

===== PAGE 1 =====

IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 17, NO. 7, APRIL 1, 2017 2021
Adaptable Vehicle Detection and Speed Estimation
for Changeable Urban Trafﬁc With Anisotropic
Magnetoresistive Sensors
Qifan Wei and Bo Yang, Member, IEEE
Abstract— This paper presents an adaptable roadside
vehicle detection and speed estimation system for various trafﬁc
conditions on urban roads based on tri-axial anisotropic mag-
netoresistive sensors and wireless sensor network. The system
consists of one master node and two sensor nodes, which are
placed along the roadsides and can measure the earth’s local
magnetic ﬁeld disturbance caused by passing vehicles. A dynamic
threshold detection algorithm is proposed for vehicle detection,
especially considering the actual variable trafﬁc condition. The
vehicle speed is estimated on the basis of the maximum values and
the cross correlation of effective parts extracted from two sensor
signals. We have tested the vehicle information at several roads
under different trafﬁc conditions. Validation study has revealed
a high detection accuracy of 97.92% when using a dynamic
threshold compared with 92.3% when using a ﬁxed threshold.
And, the average accuracy of speed estimation can reach up to
97.11% on the roads. The proposed algorithm has a signiﬁcant
increase in accuracy, reliability, and practicability compared with
the ﬁxed threshold algorithm.
Index Terms — Anisotropic magnetoresistive sensor (AMR),
vehicle detection, speed estimation, changeable urban trafﬁc.
I. I NTRODUCTION
V
EHICLE detection and speed measurement technologies
are used to collect trafﬁc information in the Intelligent
Transportation System (ITS). N owadays, vehicle detection
systems commonly use inductive loop detector [1], video
camera [2] and radar detector [3], etc. The installation and
maintenance of inductive loop requires interrupting transporta-
tion, which will lead to a high cost. The video camera is
greatly affected by the environment, such as light intensity.
The radar detector has poor adaptability to the weather and
can be easily inﬂuenced by temperature and air ﬂow. All of
them are expensive for a large-scale deployment. Recently, the
magnetic sensor has attracted great attention due to its low
cost and low power consumption. It can be used with wireless
sensor network for vehicle detection, which is reliable, easily
installed and can reach high accuracy [4].
Researchers have proposed many vehicle detection meth-
ods with magnetic sensors. One approach is using a cross-
correlation between the measur ed signal and the reference
Manuscript received July 20, 2016; revised November 29, 2016; accepted
January 9, 2017. Date of publication Ja nuary 17, 2017; date of current version
March 8, 2017. The associate editor coor dinating the review of this paper and
approving it for publication was Dr. Themis Prodromakis.
The authors are with the School of Automation Science and Elec-
trical Engineering, Beihang Uni versity, Beijing 100191, China (e-mail:
boyang@buaa.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/JSEN.2017.2654501
signal to detect vehicle [5]. However, ﬁnding the proper
reference signal is not easy, which will cause high power com-
putation. In contrast, the threshold-based methods are simple
and easy-to-use. Balid et al. [6] updates the localized magnetic
ﬁeld reference components and analyze various vehicles to
decrease the detection error. This algorithm can detect various
vehicles with different speeds successfully. In our previous
work, we proposed a ﬁxed threshold state machine algorithm
based on signal variance [7]. It can suppress the signal drift
caused by changed temperature and the detection accuracy can
reach up to 99.05%. However, the urban trafﬁc is complex and
changeable, and the ﬁxed thresholds cannot adapt to different
trafﬁc conditions. Therefore, adjusting thresholds according to
the changeable trafﬁc condition simply and automatically will
be a new direction for further research.
To estimate the vehicle speeds, a single sensor [8] or two
longitudinally spaced sensors [9] are generally used. A speed
estimation algorithm based on the calculation of cross correla-
tion was proposed in [10], and the time delay can be obtained
based on the maximum value of the calculation results. Saber
Taghvaeeyan et al. used the fast Fourier transform (FFT) to
calculate the cross correlation, which can reduce computation
and greatly improve accuracy to 97.5% [11]. However, the
algorithms mentioned above only considered the case of a
single vehicle passing by the sensors. In urban trafﬁc, the
vehicles always crawl bumper to bumper, so we need to extract
the effective signal of each vehicle from sensor signal. The
conventional vehicle signal extraction method is based on the
vehicle entering and leaving points [7], [12]. Slight changes of
the detection points will result in a great change in the vehicle
speed, especially with a low sampling frequency in wireless
sensor network. Hence decreasing the impact of these vehicle
detection points will increase t he speed estimation accuracy.
In this paper, we propose an adaptable vehicle detection and
speed estimation system, which can be used in the changeable
and complex urban trafﬁc. The system is based on triaxial
anisotropic magnetoresistive (AMR) sensors and wireless sen-
sor network, and it can be placed along the roadside without
any inﬂuence on the trafﬁc. A dynamic threshold detection
algorithm is proposed to detect vehicles, and the thresholds can
be dynamically adjusted according to the trafﬁc condition. The
maximum values of the two sensors and the cross correlation
between them are analyzed to extract vehicle signals and
estimate vehicle speed. The experimental results have shown
that the proposed algorithms can ﬁt the urban trafﬁc with high
accuracy.
1558-1748 © 2017 I EEE. Personal u se is perm itted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:30:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 2 =====

2022 IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 17, NO. 7, APRIL 1, 2017
Fig. 1. Principle of vehicle detection based on magnetic sensor:
(a) the disturbance of geomagnetic ﬁeld by a moving vehicle [13] and
(b) AMR sensor bridge.
Fig. 2. The sensor node in the sensing system.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces
the conﬁguration of the sensing system. Section III describes
the algorithm for vehicle detecting considering the actual
trafﬁc condition. The speed estimation method is discussed
in section IV . Section V shows the experimental results of
vehicle detection and vehicle s peed estimation. Finally, some
conclusions are contained in section VI.
II. S
ENSING SYSTEM CONFIGURATION
The geomagnetic ﬁeld can be disturbed by the ferromagnetic
material in vehicles. The magnetic sensor is used to detect
the variation of geomagnetic ﬁeld and can output a voltage
value by a Wheatstone bridge. Figure 1 shows the principle
of vehicle detection based on magnetic sensor.
The sensor system and the sensor setup used in this paper
are the same as that in [7]. We use the Honeywell HMC5883L
triaxial anisotropic magnetoresistive sensor in this system due
to its high level of integration and low cost. The sensor has
a build-in 12 bits analogue-to-digital converter (ADC) and
achieves 0.5μT resolution in ±800.0μT Fields. The average
current drain of the sensor is only 100 .0μA and as low as
2.0μA in standby mode. Figure 2 shows one of the two sensor
nodes in the system, which contains a CC2430 processor and
a magnetic sensor. There are also four infrared sensors and a
sound sensor in the sensor node for other measurement tasks.
All the nodes are battery-powered with small size, and they
can be easily installed along the roadside.
Figure 3 shows the deployment of the system consisting
of one master node and two sensor nodes. The sensor nodes
and master node are connected wirelessly, and the measured
data can be transferred to a laptop through a RS232 serial
port. The master node works as the clock source and provides
Fig. 3. The conﬁguration of the sensor system.
Fig. 4. Current drain of the sensor node.
time synchronization for all the nodes. The master node is
in the working state all the time, and the sensor nodes work
in sleep and wake-up state. Th rough polling mechanism, the
master node can receive the data from the two sensor nodes
successively. Figure 4 shows the current drain of the sensor
nodes working in different states. The current drain is much
higher when the sensor node is transmitting and receiving
data. To reduce the power consumption, vehicle detection and
speed estimation algorithm with a low sampling frequency is
concerned. The sampling frequency of each sensor node is
set as 25 Hz and deﬁned as f
s in this paper. Sensor node 1 is
used to detect vehicles and the detection algorithm is described
in Section III. Sensor node 2 is used to estimate the vehicle
speed along with sensor node 1 and the method is discussed
in Section IV . Considering the similarity of the two sensor
nodes and the sampling frequency, the distance between the
two sensor nodes is experimentally set as 3 m. The x-axis
of magnetic sensor is parallel to the direction of the moving
vehicles, the y-axis is perpendicular to the direction of the
moving vehicles, and the z-axis is perpendicular to the ground.
III. V
EHICLE DETECTION
A. Multi-State Machine
The ﬂuctuation of geomagnetic ﬁeld is relatively weak and
can be disturbed easily by the surrounding electromagnetic
ﬁeld. Figure 5 (a) shows the signals measured along the
x-, y-, and z-axis respectively for a two-box vehicle passing
in the near road. The horizontal ax is represents the sampling
points of the magnetic sensor, while the vertical axis represents
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:30:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 3 =====

WEI AND Y ANG: ADAPTABLE VEHICLE DETECTION AND SPEED ESTIMATION FOR CHANGEABLE URBAN TRAFFIC 2023
Fig. 5. Magnetic signals of a two-box ve hicle: (a) original signals and
(b) signals after ﬁltering.
Fig. 6. Signals of a two-box vehicle a fter processing: (a) F and (b) F after
ﬁltering and (c) the variance of F and ( d) the ﬁnal signal after processing.
the intensity of magnetic ﬁeld. A median ﬁlter and a moving
average ﬁlter are used and the ﬁltered signals are shown
in Fig. 5(b).
We use the data preprocessing algorithm in our previous
work [7]. There will be a drift in background signal when
the temperature changes [14], and this algorithm can not only
reduce the inﬂuence of the signal drift, but also retain the
characteristics of the magnetic ﬁeld intensity signal.
F is deﬁned as the magnetic ﬁeld intensity here:
F =
√
X2 + Y 2 + Z2, (1)
where X, Y , and Z are the magnetic readings of x-, y-, and
z-axis of magnetic sensor respectively. The ﬁnal signal used
to detect vehicles is called Final _F, which is given by
Final _F = Filtered _F ×
√
Va rianc e_F, (2)
where Filtered _F is the signal of F after ﬁltering and
Va rianc e_F is the variance of Filtered _F. The signals of
the two-box vehicle mentioned above are shown in Fig. 6.
Vehicles on the adjacent road can also affect the AMR
sensor output, and an experiment was performed to analyze
the inﬂuence. The system layout is illustrated in Fig. 7. The
vehicle passed by the sensors on the adjacent road, and its
signals are shown in Fig. 8. The amplitudes of signals are
much smaller than the signals shown in Fig. 6. As a result,
the inﬂuence caused by the ve hicles on adjacent road can be
neglected compared with those on the near road.
In our previous work, we used a ﬁxed threshold state
machine algorithm based on signal variance. We consider
Fig. 7. Sensor installation diagram.
Fig. 8. Signals of a two-box vehicle on the adjacent road: (a) F and (b) F after
ﬁltering and (c) the variance of F and ( d) the ﬁnal signal after processing.
Fig. 9. The misjudgment results using our previous algorithm: (a) a jamming
signal misjudged as one vehicle and (b) one vehicle misjudged as two.
the vehicle entering and leavi ng the sensor monitoring area
when the value of ﬁnal signal is just higher than the High
Threshold and just lower than the Low Threshold, respectively.
This algorithm, however, may lead to wrong judgment on
vehicle detection. Fig. 9 (a) shows that a jamming signal is
regarded as a vehicle signal and the interference is caused by
a wheelbarrow passing by the sensor. Fig. 9 (b) shows that a
low-speed vehicle (about 1.7 m/s) is mistaken for two vehicles.
Referring to the multi-state machine proposed in
[6] and [15], we add two intermediate states on the
basis of the previous one. It still uses the deviations of
Final _F from High Threshold and Low Threshold to detect
vehicles. The schematic of this algorithm is presented in
Fig. 10 and the input is deﬁned as SI , which is given by
SI =
⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩
0 Final _F(n) ≤ Low Threshold
2 Final _F(n) ≥ High Threshold
1 other wise ,
(3)
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:30:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 4 =====

2024 IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 17, NO. 7, APRIL 1, 2017
Fig. 10. State machine used in the sensor system for vehicle detection.
Fig. 11. Vehicle detection results using our improved algorithm:
(a) a jamming signal judgment and (b) one vehicle judgment.
where Final _F(n) represents the corresponding value of
Final _F of the n th sampling point. INIT counts for the
initial state, and all parameters are set to initial values. Count 0
is the intermediate state which represents counter for vehicles
entering the sensor monitoring area. When the vehicle signal is
higher than the High Threshold, the counter starts to count the
number, and the counting results are compared with counting
threshold set as M1. If the signal becomes lower than the
High Threshold when the counting result is still smaller than
M1, the counter will be cleared to 0. Count 00 represents
counter for vehicle leaving the sensor monitoring area, and
the counting result is compared with M2. By adding the two
intermediate states, we expect to recognize the interference and
improve the stability of this algorithm. Count 1, in addition,
is used to record the lasting time for vehicles staying in
the sensor monitoring area. Finally, Car and Nocar are the
outputs of this state machine.
Figure 11 shows the detection results of our improved
algorithm for small disturban ces and very low speed vehicle,
and the detection accuracy is clearly improved.
B. Dynamic Threshold Detection Algorithm
The accuracy of vehicle detection is closely related to
the values of High and Low Thresholds, and how to select
the proper thresholds is discussed in this paper. In urban
trafﬁc, the trafﬁc condition is changeable, so the following
experiments were performed in order to ﬁnd the relationship
between the two thresholds and the trafﬁc condition. Note that
the target used to describe the trafﬁc condition is called NUM ,
Fig. 12. Vehicle detection results ba sed on the ﬁxed thresholds algorithm:
(a) NUM = 6a n d( b )NUM = 2.
which refers to the total number of passing vehicles in about
20 seconds (the time required for sampling 500 points).
The sensing system was placed along Xueyuan Road in
Haidian District, Beijing. The vehicles driving on the road
includes two-box vehicle, sal oon, sports utility vehicle (SUV)
and van. The speed ranges from 4-14m/s and the number of
vehicles is bigger in the rush hour. To analyze the detection
accuracy under different trafﬁc condition, we test two different
cases: NUM = 6a n d NUM = 2, and these 8 vehicles are
all two-box vehicles. Figure 12 shows the detection results of
the two signals based on the same thresholds. For the case
NUM = 6a n dNUM = 2, their optimal thresholds values
have no intersection. In Figure 12, the chosen thresholds are
optimal for the case NUM = 6, while being too high for the
case NUM = 2. As for our previous work in [7], the trafﬁc
condition is limited during the test, which makes the optimal
thresholds can be found easily, and the vehicle detection can
achieve high accuracy. However, the ﬁxed threshold algorithm
is not applicable for variable urban trafﬁc, which means poor
adaptability of the algorithm. A dynamic threshold detection
algorithm is required.
Our previous work presented an adaptive threshold detection
algorithm, which detects vehicles with constantly-changing
thresholds. The thresholds will change as long as there is
a slightly change of the sensor signal, which results in a
poor anti-jamming ability of the algorithm. The adaptive
thresholds change depend on the variance of the history signal.
When the low speed vehicles pass by the sensor, the adaptive
threshold increases due to the inﬂuence of the front vehicle,
so the thresholds keep rising correspondingly. Sometimes, the
threshold adjustments are too high for the purpose of proper
vehicle detection [7]. Hence th e detection result, especially
when the vehicles crawl bumper to bumper with low-speed in
urban trafﬁc, is not satisfactory.
A dynamic threshold multi-state machine algorithm is pro-
posed to improve the capacity of resisting interference and
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:30:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 5 =====

WEI AND Y ANG: ADAPTABLE VEHICLE DETECTION AND SPEED ESTIMATION FOR CHANGEABLE URBAN TRAFFIC 2025
Fig. 13. Determination of the High an d Low Thresholds: (a) the value of x
and (b) the values of mag and the two thresholds.
avoid over frequent threshold adjustments. Va rianc e_F is
used as a preliminary judgment signal and Final _F is used
to determine the values of High and Low (Fig.13). Firstly,
we set an initial threshold for Va rianc e_F, which can be
deﬁned as Th re sho ld_Va r. There may be a vehicle entering
when V arianced _F is just higher than it, and the sampling
point can be deﬁned as x. Then we can extract a segment of
the Final _F b a s e do nt h ev a l u eo fx
seg ={ Final _F(x), Final _F(x+1) ,..., Final _F(x+k)},
(4)
where k is experimentally set to 30.
Deﬁne
mag = max(seg). (5)
Notice that mag happens to get the maximum of Final _F,
but it is not always the case. If the speed of vehicle is too
slow, mag occurs before the maximum value. Now we can
get the High and Low Thresholds by
{
High Threshold = mag/2;
Low Threshold = l∗mag/2; 0 < l < 1, (6)
where l is experimentally set to 0.9. Then if the value of
Va rianc e_F is sustainably higher than Th re sho ld_Va r,t h e
High and Low Thresholds remain unchanged. When it is
lower than Th re sho ld_Va r, the High and Low Thresholds are
resumed to the initial value. By this way, the two thresholds
are dynamically adjusted according to the change of sensor
signal when the vehicle is entering, and they will not be too
high to detect vehicles.
M1a n d M2, in addition, also inﬂuence the detection
result. The recognizition of the noise affects the selection
of M1. During the experiments, the duration of the noise is
always less than 150 ms. As the sampling period is 40 ms,
considering the High Threshold, M1 is set as 4 (160ms) in
the experiments. When the vehicle speed is small enough,
Final _F will ﬂuctuate and the signal may be lower than the
Low Threshold during the time when the vehicle is passing
by the sensor. Increasing M2 can prevent the misdetection.
We tested about 3000 vehicles, and almost all of the vehicles
Fig. 14. Vehicle detection results using our improved algorithm:
(a) NUM = 6a n d( b )NUM = 2.
arrive beyond 200ms. Considering the Low threshold, M2i s
set as 3 (120ms) in the experiments.
Figure 14 shows the detection results using the improved
algorithm. After adjusting the thresholds, the vehicles can be
detected under different trafﬁc conditions.
Using the algorithm proposed in this paper, we only need
to set a group of initial thresholds for Final _F ﬁrstly, and
then the thresholds are dynami cally adjusted according to the
actual trafﬁc condition. Compared with the adaptive threshold
vehicle detection algorithms mentioned in [7] and [16], though
the thresholds are all adjusted dynamically, the signal used to
detect vehicles and the adjustment process of the thresholds are
different. Final _F used in the paper can reduce the inﬂuences
caused by the signal drift and the vehicles on the adjacent
road. The adjustment of the thresholds in the paper does not
merely depend on the history signal, which guarantees the
vehicle detection result less affected by the front vehicles. Our
proposed algorithm can apply to different trafﬁc conditions and
ﬁt the urban trafﬁc.
IV . S
PEED ESTIMATION
To estimate the individual vehicle speed of passing vehicles,
two roadside and longitudinally deployed sensor nodes are
used in this sensing system. The speed of passing vehicle can
be given by
Vi = S
/Delta1T , (7)
where S is the distance between two sensors and /Delta1T is the
time interval of a vehicle passing by them. To measure the time
interval more precisely, the cross correlation between the two
sensor signals along with the maximum values is used in this
paper. Note that the sensor signal used here is Filtered _F.
As the two sensor nodes are close to each other, we can
assume that the speed is nearly constant as the vehicle passing
by the two sensors. The signals of sensor 1 and 2 are similar
and we can calculate the cross correlation between them to
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:30:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 6 =====

2026 IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 17, NO. 7, APRIL 1, 2017
Fig. 15. (a) Signals of sensor 1 and 2. (b) The extracted vehicle signals
based on the maximum values.
estimate the vehicle speed [10], [11]. Figure 15(a) shows the
two signals when there are 6 vehicles passing by the two
sensors in about 20 seconds. In urban trafﬁc, vehicles always
pass by the magnetic sensor in succession. To estimate the
speed of each vehicle, extracting the effective part of each
vehicle signal is important. As the conventional vehicle speed
estimation method seldom describes how to extract vehicle
signal in detail, we take the signal extraction method used in
vehicle classiﬁcation as a reference. It is always based on the
detection points [17] and the vehicle signals of sensor 1 and 2
can be represented as
{
B
1 ={ F1(m), F1(m + 1), F1(m + 2) ,..., F1(m + k1)}
B2 ={ F2(n), F2(n + 1), F2(n + 2) ,..., F2(n + k2)},
(8)
where F1 and F2 are the signals of sensor 1 and sensor 2,
respectively. F1(m) and F2(n) are just bigger than the high
thresholds, F1(m + k1) and F2(n + k2) are just smaller than
the low thresholds. However, one drawback of this method
is that the vehicle signal extraction is greatly affected by the
high and low thresholds. If the high threshold is set slightly
lower, the vehicle entering points will be detected earlier.
Finding the right time vehicles entering and leaving the sensor
detection zone are difﬁcult. The speed estimation result will
be heavily dependent on the thresholds, especially in low
sampling frequency conditions.
We extract the effective parts of the vehicle signals based on
their maximum values B
1 and B2, and the maximum values of
sampling points are deﬁned as n1m a x and n2m a x, respectively.
Now we can use N points around n1m a x and n2m a x to replace
the whole vehicle signals of sensor 1 and 2. The signals can
be represented as
⎧
⎪⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪⎪
⎪
⎩
B
′
1 ={ F1(n1m a x− (N − 1)/2) ,..., F1(n1m a x) ,...,
F1(n1m a x+ (N − 1)/2)}
B′
2 ={ F2(n2m a x− (N − 1)/2) ,..., F2(n2m a x) ,...,
F2(n2m a x+ (N − 1)/2)}.
(9)
To ensure that more accurate matching points can be
selected, N is experimentally set in this paper to 51, approx-
imately 2 times the signal sampling frequency. Figure 15(b)
shows the schematic view of signal segmentation of the above
TABLE I
SIMILARITY BETWEEN B′′
1 AND B′′
2
six vehicles. As a result, our proposed algorithm takes the
maximum values of the sensor signals into account besides
the cross correlation of them, and thus can extract effective
parts from the sensor signals.
With the low sampling frequency in our system, the sam-
pling points are limited. We know that the sampling frequency
is fs , so the maximum error of the time interval can reach
up to 1 /fs seconds. The curve ﬁt model method with the
cubic equation is used to ﬁt the experiment data to improve
the accuracy of speed estimation. Then a number of equally
spaced sampling points are used to represent the result and
the oversampling frequency is set to 10 fs , with the consider-
ation of calculation and accuracy. The two oversampled and
curve ﬁtted sensor signals of a vehicle can be represented as
B
′′
1 and B′′
2 , and the length of them are both 10 N. Then,
B′′
2 can be time-shifted to the left or right to ﬁnd the number
of curve ﬁtted samples required that produces maximum
cross-correlation between B′′
1 and the time-shifted version
of B′′
2 .
To verify the similarity between B′′
1 and B′′
2 ,w et e s t e d
80 vehicles passing by the sensors in succession, which
contains 6 SUVs, 2 two-box cars, 5 vans and 67 saloons. The
correlation coefﬁcient is used as criterion and Table I shows
the results. The average correlation coefﬁcient is higher than
0.98 for each type of the vehicles. As a result, B
′′
1 and B′′
2 are
similar to each other.
We deﬁne nd as the number of sample delay.
nd = n1m a x− n2m a x+
arg maxm r(m)
10 , (10)
where
r(m) =
10N∑
n=1
B′′
1 (n)B′′
2 (n − m), −(10N− 1) ≤ m ≤ 10N− 1.
(11)
The Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) is used to compute r(m)
to reduce the amount of computation required. The method is
described as follows.
Firstly we ﬁnd a number called P, which meets
2
P−1 ≤ 10N + (10N − 1) ≤ 2P. (12)
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:30:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 7 =====

WEI AND Y ANG: ADAPTABLE VEHICLE DETECTION AND SPEED ESTIMATION FOR CHANGEABLE URBAN TRAFFIC 2027
Then ﬁll B′′
1 and B′′
2 with zeros to a length of 2 P and we
obtain
˜B′′
1 (n) =
{
B′′
1 (n)( n = 1, 2,..., 10N)
0 (n = 10N + 1,..., 2P)
˜B′′
2 (n) =
{
B′′
2 (n)( n = 1, 2,..., 10N)
0 (n = 10N + 1,..., 2P). (13)
Deﬁne
X1(k) = FFT ( ˜B′′
1 (n))
X2(k) = FFT ( ˜B′′
2 (n)) ( k, n = 1, 2, 3,..., 10N). (14)
Now r(m) can be computed by
r(m) = IFFT (X1(k) ∗ ¯X2(k)) ( k = 1, 2, 3,..., 10N)
(m = 0, 1, 2,..., 10N − 1), (15)
where ¯X2(k) is the conjugation of X2(k). Exchanging the order
of X1(k) and X2(k),t h e nw eg e t
r(m) = IFFT (X2(k) ∗ ¯X1(k)) ( k = 1, 2, 3,..., 10N)
(m = 0,−1,..., −(10N − 1)). (16)
Now that r(m) has been determined, we can obtain nd based
on (10). The time delay of a vehicle passing by the two sensors
can be calculated by
/Delta1T = nd
fs
. (17)
Finally, the speed of passing vehicles can be computed
by (7). We can extract the vehicle signals of sensor 1 and 2
with high similarity, and thus estimate the vehicle speed even
the vehicles crawl bumper to bumper in the complex urban
trafﬁc.
V. E
XPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
A. Vehicle Detection
Several experiments were conducted on different roads in
Haidian District, Beijing, and the tests were performed at
different times under different trafﬁc conditions, and we can
observe the adaptability of th e algorithm proposed in this
paper. The test duration of eachexperiment is about 10 minutes
and the vehicle detection results are listed in Table I. Note that
the high and low thresholds used in our previous method are
60 and 50, respectively.
Table II shows the detection accuracy. After using the
dynamic threshold multi-state m achine algorithm, the detec-
tion accuracy can reach up to 100% with the low trafﬁc
volume. With the increasing of trafﬁc ﬂow, a slight reduction
in detection accuracy is observed. This is probably caused by
the increased complexity of the sensor signal on busy roads.
The accuracy is still over 95% on road 3, highlighting the
adaptability of the proposed approach under different trafﬁc
conditions. As a whole, the average accuracy can reach up to
97.92%, increased by 5.62% compared with the previous algo-
rithm. The improved vehicle detection algorithm is adapted to
changeable trafﬁc ﬂow and has signiﬁcant improvement on
accuracy.
TABLE II
RESULTS OF VEHICLE DETECTION
Fig. 16. Speed estimation results using our improved speed algorithm.
B. Speed Estimation
To verify the speed estimation accuracy, we tested 80
vehicles which passed by the sensors sequentially on Xueyuan
Road in Haidian District, Beijing. A video was used as a
reference to measure the time delay of a vehicle passing by
the two reference lines. The distance of the two lines is 8m
and the resolution of time is 1/50 second. Figure 16 shows the
speed estimation accuracy of the 80 vehicles.
For the above 80 vehicles, the average speed estimation
accuracy can reach up to 97.11%. During the test, a few
vehicles passed by the sensors with non-uniform speed, which
results in the poor similarity between the two sensor signals,
and an increase in the error of speed estimation
Although the speed estimatio n result is still inﬂuenced by
the actual vehicle movement, the algorithm proposed in this
paper can reach good accuracy as a whole and it is more stable
and adaptable.
VI. C
ONCLUSION
This paper focuses on the urban trafﬁc, and presents an
adaptable roadside vehicle detection and speed estimation
system with triaxial anisotropic magnetoresistive sensors.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:30:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 8 =====

2028 IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 17, NO. 7, APRIL 1, 2017
A novel dynamic threshold multi-state machine algorithm is
proposed, which takes the actual changeable trafﬁc condition
into account. The speed estimation is based on the maximum
values of the two sensor signals of passing vehicles and the
cross-correlation between them. The experimental results show
that the proposed algorithms have signiﬁcant improvement
in accuracy and adaptability, which veriﬁes that this sensor
system is promising for application in urban trafﬁc.
In this paper, we concern about the estimation of moving
vehicles, and will investigate vehicle detection for severe
congested trafﬁc, i.e., the stalled trafﬁc, in the near future.
R
EFERENCES
[1] S. S. M. Ali, B. George, and L. Vanajakshi, “A simple multiple loop
sensor conﬁguration for vehicle detection in an undisciplined trafﬁc,”
in Proc. IEEE 5th Int. Conf. ICST , Palmerston North, New Zealand,
Nov. 2011, pp. 644–649.
[2] Z. Sun, G. Bebis, and R. Miller, “On-road vehicle detection: A review,”
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. , vol. 28, no. 5, pp. 694–711,
May 2006.
[3] S. J. Park, T. Y . Kim, S. M. Kang, and K. H. Heon, “A novel signal
processing technique for vehicle detection radar,” in IEEE MTT-S Int.
Microw. Symp. Dig., vol. 1, Jun. 2003, pp. 607–610.
[4] P. Ni, L. Le, and W. Yu, “Review of vehicle detection algorithms
based on magnetoresistive sensors,” Comput. Eng. Appl., vol. 45, no. 19,
pp. 245–248, 2009.
[5] H. Zhu and F. Yu, “A vehicle parking detection method based on
correlation of magnetic signals,” Int. J. Distrib. Sensor Netw., vol. 2015,
no. 1, pp. 1–13, 2015.
[6] W. Balid, H. Taﬁsh, and H. H. Refai, “Development of portable wireless
sensor network system for real-time trafﬁc surveillance,” in Proc. IEEE
18th Int. Conf. Intell. Transp. Syst. , Sep. 2015, pp. 1630–1637.
[7] B. Yang and Y . Lei, “Vehicle detection and classiﬁcation for low-
speed congested trafﬁc with anisotropic magnetoresistive sensor,” IEEE
Sensors J., vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 1132–1138, Feb. 2015.
[8] H. Li, H. Dong, L. Jia, D. Xu, and Y . Qin, “Some practical vehicle speed
estimation methods by a single trafﬁc magnetic sensor,” in Proc. 14th
Int. IEEE Conf. Intell. Transp. Syst. (ITSC) , Oct. 2011, pp. 1566–1573.
[9] V . Markevicius, D. Navikas, M. Zilys, D. Andriukaitis, A. Valinevicius,
and M. Cepenas, “Dynamic vehicle detection via the use of magnetic
ﬁeld sensors,” Sensors, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 1–9, Jan. 2016.
[10] S. Gontarz, P. Szulim, J. Se´ nko, and J. Dybała, “Use of magnetic
monitoring of vehicles for proactive strategy development,” Transp.
Res. C, Emerg. Technol. , vol. 52, pp. 102–115, Mar. 2015.
[11] S. Taghvaeeyan and R. Rajamani, “Po rtable roadside sensors for vehicle
counting, classiﬁcation, and speed measurement,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
Transp. Syst., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 73–83, Feb. 2014.
[12] J. Lan, Y . Xiang, L. Wang, and Y . S hi, “Vehicle detection and classi-
ﬁcation by measuring and processing magnetic signal,” Measurement,
vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 174–180, Jan. 2011.
[13] S.-Y . Cheung and P. Varaiya, “Trafﬁc surveillance by wireless sensor
networks: Final report,” Inst. Transp. Stud., Univ. California, Berkeley,
CA, USA, Tech. Rep. UCB-ITS-PRR-2007-4, 2007.
[14] P. Ripka, M. Butta, and A. Platil, “Temperature stability of AMR
sensors,” Sensor Lett., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 74–77, Jan. 2013.
[15] A. N. Knaian, “A wireless sensor network for smart roadbeds and intel-
ligent transportation systems,” M.S. thesis, Dept. Elect. Eng. Comput.
Sci., Masschusetts Inst. Tec hnol., Cambridge, MA, USA, 2000.
[16] R. Hostettler and W. Birk, “Analysis of the adaptive threshold vehicle
detection algorithm applied to trafﬁc vibrations,” in Proc. 18th IFAC
World Congr., Milan, Italy, Aug. 2011, pp. 2150–2155.
[17] S. Keawkamnerd, J. Chinrungrueng, and C. Jaruchart, “Vehicle Classi-
ﬁcation with low computation magnetic sensor,” in Proc. 8th Int. Conf.
ITS Telecommun., Oct. 2008, pp. 164–169.
Qifan Wei was born in Henan, China, in 1995.
She received the B.S. degree in automation science
and electric engineering from Beihang University,
Beijing, China, in 2015, where she is currently
pursuing the M.S. degree with the School of
Automation Science and Electrical Engineering. Her
research interest includes wireless sensor networks.
Bo Yang (M’14) was born in Sichuan, China,
in 1972. She received the B.S. and M.S. degrees
in electrical engineering from Beihang University,
Beijing, China, in 1993 and 1996, respectively, and
the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the
University of Paderborn, Paderborn, Germany, in
2004.
Since 2004, she has been with the School of
Automation Science and Electrical Engineering,
Beihang University, where she is currently a
Professor. Her main research interests include intel-
ligent measurement and motion control.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:30:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 