

===== PAGE 1 =====

sensors
Article
A Survey and Comparison of Low-Cost Sensing
Technologies for Road Trafﬁc Monitoring
Marcin Bernas 1
 , Bartłomiej Płaczek 2,*
 , Wojciech Korski 3, Piotr Loska 3, Jarosław Smyła 3
and Piotr Szymała 3
1 Department of Computer Science and Automatics, University of Bielsko-Biala, 43-309 Bielsko-Biala, Poland;
marcin.bernas@gmail.com
2 Institute of Computer Science, University of Silesia, 41-200 Sosnowiec, Poland
3 Institute of Innovative Technologies EMAG, 40-189 Katowice, Poland; Wojciech.Korski@ibemag.pl (W.K.);
Piotr.Loska@ibemag.pl (P .L.); Jaroslaw.Smyla@ibemag.pl (J.S.); Piotr.Szymala@ibemag.pl (P .S.)
* Correspondence: placzek.bartlomiej@gmail.com; Tel.: +48-32-3689760
Received: 9 August 2018; Accepted: 24 September 2018; Published: 26 September 2018
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045/gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Abstract: This paper reviews low-cost vehicle and pedestrian detection methods and compares
their accuracy. The main goal of this survey is to summarize the progress achieved to date and to
help identify the sensing technologies that provide high detection accuracy and meet requirements
related to cost and ease of installation. Special attention is paid to wireless battery-powered detectors
of small dimensions that can be quickly and effortlessly installed alongside trafﬁc lanes (on the
side of a road or on a curb) without any additional supporting structures. The comparison of
detection methods presented in this paper is based on results of experiments that were conducted
with a variety of sensors in a wide range of conﬁgurations. During experiments various sensor
sets were analyzed. It was shown that the detection accuracy can be signiﬁcantly improved by
fusing data from appropriately selected set of sensors. The experimental results reveal that accurate
vehicle detection can be achieved by using sets of passive sensors. Application of active sensors was
necessary to obtain satisfactory results in case of pedestrian detection.
Keywords: vehicle detection; pedestrian detection; sensor fusion; low-cost sensors; intelligent
transport systems; machine learning
1. Introduction
The objective of road trafﬁc monitoring is to collect information about different trafﬁc
participants. This information is necessary to provide various services that enable smoother, safer, and
environmentally friendly transportation. Examples of such services are adaptive trafﬁc signals [ 1],
variable speed limits, traveler information, and route guidance. One of the most important trafﬁc
monitoring tasks is detection of vehicles and pedestrians. In case of conventional trafﬁc monitoring
systems, this task is carried out with use of intrusive detectors that have to be installed in the pavement
(e.g., inductive loops, micro-loop probes, piezoelectric sensors) or detectors that require installation
of supporting structures (video detectors, radars). Installation and maintenance of the conventional
detectors are expensive and induce serious disruption of trafﬁc.
The disadvantages of conventional detectors have motivated recent development of low-cost
sensing technologies for road trafﬁc monitoring that enable easy installation and maintenance of the
detectors. This paper reviews the low-cost trafﬁc monitoring methods and compares their accuracy.
The comparison of trafﬁc monitoring methods presented in this paper is based on results of experiments
that were conducted with a variety of sensors in a wide range of conﬁgurations. Main goal of this
survey is to summarize the progress achieved to date and to help identify the sensing technologies
Sensors 2018, 18, 3243; doi:10.3390/s18103243 www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors

===== PAGE 2 =====

Sensors 2018, 18, 3243 2 of 27
that provide high detection accuracy and meet requirements related to cost and ease of installation.
Special attention is paid in this study to wireless detectors of small dimensions that can be quickly
and effortlessly installed alongside trafﬁc lanes (on the side of a road or on a curb) without any
additional supporting structures. The wirelesses detectors are powered by batteries. The lifetime of
these detectors depends on energy consumption. Therefore, low energy consumption of sensors is also
considered as an important requirement.
Recent surveys of road trafﬁc monitoring systems have focused mainly on vision-based
methods [2,3]. Shirazi and Morris [ 4] reviewed studies on various advanced sensing technologies
applied to intersection monitoring. Nellore and Hancke [ 5] focused on applications of wireless
sensor networks in urban trafﬁc management. Pedestrian detection techniques for driving assistance
systems have been reviewed in [6]. According to the authors knowledge no comprehensive survey
exists speciﬁcally addressing low-cost trafﬁc monitoring techniques. This paper provides a complete
review and comparison of existing solutions that provide high detection accuracy and meet the
above-mentioned requirements related to cost and easiness of installation.
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 includes a review of literature related to the low-cost
trafﬁc monitoring technologies that include applications of infrared and visible light sensors, wireless
transmission, accelerometers, magnetometers, ultrasonic and microwave radars as well as acoustic
sensing. Vehicle and pedestrian detection experiments are described in Section 3. Details of the
experimental results are presented and discussed in Section 4. Finally, conclusions and future research
directions are given in Section 5.
2. Sensing Technologies
2.1. Applications of Infrared and Visible Light Sensors
Results of the research reported in [7] show that a visible light sensor can be successfully applied
for detection and tracking of moving objects. Variations of infrared radiation, detected by passive
infrared sensor when a vehicle or a person is passing in the vicinity of the sensor, have been utilized
in a wake-up system, which allows sensor nodes to be put into sleep mode unless their activation is
necessary. Near infrared sensors have been applied for shadows detection of objects [8]. The shadow
detection method was designed for video-detection. Possible applications of infrared cameras have
been discussed in [9]. However, in this work such applications are not considered due to the high cost
of infrared cameras.
Pulsed laser light is utilized in light detection and ranging (LIDAR) technology to measure
distances to objects. LIDARs enable speed measurement as well as detection and classiﬁcation of
vehicles [10]. The LIDAR-based solutions are effective but expensive. Moreover, LIDARs should be
installed high above the road, which usually requires additional supporting structures.
The sensing technologies based on image analysis (in infrared and visible spectrum) [ 11],
and LIDARs [12] are powerful tools for road trafﬁc monitoring (achieve accuracy above 90%), however
their use is associated with high energy consumption.
2.2. Methods Based on Signal Strength Analysis in Wireless Communication Networks
In the related literature, several efforts have been made to explore the possibility of road trafﬁc
monitoring with use of wireless communication networks. The vehicles detection and localization
tasks were performed by analyzing channel state information (CSI) [ 13], received signal strength
indicator (RSSI) [14,15], link quality indicator (LQI), and packet loss rate [16].
A method, which uses wireless transmission to detect road trafﬁc congestion, was proposed
in [16]. This method requires wireless transmitters and receivers. The transmitters continuously
send packets. The receivers, which are placed on the opposite side of a road, evaluate the RSSI, LQI,
and packet loss metrics. It was shown that these metrics enable recognition between free-ﬂow and

===== PAGE 3 =====

Sensors 2018, 18, 3243 3 of 27
congested trafﬁc states with high accuracy. The method was implemented and tested with use of
ZigBee motes.
A similar ZigBee network was adapted in [ 15] for vehicle detection. The experimental results
presented in that work conﬁrm that a vehicle passing between the network nodes causes a drop of
RSSI value. It was also observed that the gradient of RSSI drop depends on the vehicle speed.
In [17] a method was introduced for vehicle detection and speed estimation, which is based on
RSSI analysis in network composed of two WiFi access points and two WiFi-equipped laptops. Mean
value and variance of RSSI measurements were used to discriminate between three states: empty road,
stopped vehicle, and moving vehicle. The experimental results reported in [17] show that variance of
RSSI decreases with increasing vehicle speed. This dependency was used for speed estimation.
Another WiFi-based trafﬁc monitoring system was presented in [ 13]. This system utilizes
single access point and one laptop to provide functionalities of vehicle detection, classiﬁcation, lane
identiﬁcation, and speed estimation. According to that approach, CSI patterns in WiFi network are
captured and analyzed to perform the trafﬁc monitoring tasks. The CSI characterizes signal strengths
and phases of separate WiFi subcarriers. It was also demonstrated that trafﬁc lanes in a two-lane
road have different distributions of CSI data. This fact was utilized to identify in which lane a vehicle
is detected.
In [ 14] a radio-based approach for vehicle detection and classiﬁcation was introduced,
which combines ray tracing simulations, machine learning and RSSI measurements. The authors
have suggested that different types of vehicles have speciﬁc RSSI ﬁngerprints. This fact was used to
perform a machine-based vehicle classiﬁcation. The RSSI values were analyzed in wireless network
of three transmitting and three receiving units, which were positioned on opposite sides of a road.
The six wireless units were mounted on delineator posts and equipped with directional antennas.
It was demonstrated that such system is able to detect vehicles and categorize them into two classes
(passenger car and truck).
The wireless networks have been also used for detection of parked vehicles. In order to detect
the parked vehicles, the transmitting nodes are placed on parking surface and the receiving nodes are
installed at a high location. When a vehicle is parked over the transmitting node, a decrease of the RSSI
value is registered. Thus, the vehicles can be easily detected based on simple RSSI analysis. Different
systems of this type were implemented with use of CC1101 wireless communication modules [18] and
XBee motes [19].
In [20] Bluetooth low energy (BLE) beacons were used with iBeacon protocol to broadcast data
frames. The beacon frames are registered by smartphones that collect the RSSI measurements,
aggregate them and send to server for further analysis, which aims at vehicle detection
and classiﬁcation.
The RSSI-based vehicle classiﬁcation was implemented in the literature with use of various
machine learning methods: artiﬁcial neural networks, k-Nearest Neighbor (k-NN), support vector
machine (SVM), decision trees and logistic regression. A SVM method was adopted in [14] to train
vehicle classiﬁcation models and categorize vehicles into two classes (passenger car and truck).
The machine learning algorithms were trained using raw data or a set of predeﬁned features [21].
In [22] a person detection method was introduced, which is based on entropy analysis of registered
RSSI values. The experiments were performed with use of radio transmitters and receivers working
with a frequency of 2.4 GHz.
2.3. Accelerometer Applications
The possibility of vehicle detection and classiﬁcation based on vibration measurements, with use
of accelerometers, has been discussed by several authors in the related literature. In [23] it was shown
that detection of the vibrations caused by vehicles is easy to achieve by means of the currently available
accelerometers. It is worth to be noted that in this paper the applications are considered of universal
(general purpose) accelerometers.

===== PAGE 4 =====

Sensors 2018, 18, 3243 4 of 27
In [24] accelerometers were utilized for impact analysis of vibrations caused by passing vehicles
on buildings localized near a road. The measurements were performed in three locations with use of
3185D S/N 2723 accelerometer (Dytran Instruments, Chatsworth, CA, USA) mounted on a 1.2 m long
steel bar with diameter of 20 mm. The bar was stuck in the ground to absorb the energy of vibrations.
Results of those experiments have shown that personal cars and trucks can be recognized via frequency
analysis of the accelerometer readings.
The possibility of using accelerometers mounted on the road surface for estimating parameters
of passing vehicles was analyzed in [ 25]. The authors of that work have introduced an extended
Kalman ﬁlter for vehicle tracking based on a moving constant force and a wave propagation model.
The experimental results obtained for vehicle tracking in a straight road conﬁrm that such approach
enables vehicle detection as well as automatic estimation of vehicle velocity and wheelbase [ 26].
A disadvantage of that method is dependence of the results on unknown scaling factors.
The authors of [27] have investigated the impact of passing vehicle on measurements performed
by accelerometers and magnetometers. The accelerometers are used to detect axle locations of vehicle,
while the magnetometers are used to estimate vehicle speed. In the introduced trafﬁc monitoring
system, the collected data are synchronized and sent in real time to an access point. The detected
vehicles are assigned to one of predeﬁned classes based on calculated axle count and spacing.
The authors have concluded that their proposed solution allows the vehicle classiﬁcation task to
be accomplished with accuracy close to 99%.
Experimental and theoretical analysis of the pavement vibrations caused by vehicles was
conducted in [ 28]. The pavement was considered as a wave propagation medium. The authors
have estimated parameters of the wave propagation model by using a system identiﬁcation approach.
A model based on the wave propagation theory was proposed and the corresponding parameters have
been estimated from measurement data. The introduced model contributes to the understanding of
how the road reacts to the load caused by moving vehicles and what kind of vibrations is measured by
an accelerometer placed on the pavement.
A sensor network for trafﬁc monitoring with use of multiple accelerometers deployed along and
across the road, was presented in [29]. In that solution, high-sensitive piezoelectric accelerometers
have been applied that work in micro-g range. An important advantage of this kind of sensors is that
they allow the energy of vibrations to be harvested and utilized to power the sensor nodes. For the
proposed sensor network dedicated algorithms have been also developed that enable vehicle detection,
recognition of driving direction, and speed estimation based on amplitude and frequency analysis of
the registered vibrations.
Seismic sensors (three-axis geophone and single-channel seismometer) have been used for vehicle
detection by Ghost et al. [30]. The authors of that work have applied time–frequency analysis methods
to recognize vibrations produced by passing vehicles. The experiments were conducted on a dirt
road as well as on a paved road with asphalt surface. Distance between the sensor and the vehicle
detection area was about 3 m. During the experimental evaluation, the impact was considered of
disturbances caused by pedestrians and other vehicles. The results presented in [ 30] show that the
proposed solution ensures high accuracy of vehicle detection and enables vehicle classiﬁcation.
2.4. Magnetometer Applications
A method for detection of passing vehicles with use of magnetometers was described in [ 20].
The most popular solutions based on the magnetic ﬁeld sensors enable achieving accuracy of vehicles
detection comparable to that of the other methods discussed in this Section [31,32]. However, it should
be noted that these solutions require the sensors to be installed inside trafﬁc lanes.
Taghvaeeyan and Rajamani [33] have introduced remote magnetic sensors that enable counting
and classiﬁcation of vehicles as well as speed measuring. These sensors can be easily deployed outside
trafﬁc lanes without drilling the road surface. The authors have also proposed a vehicle detection
algorithm, which uses a model of magnetic ﬁeld to provide correct results in case of disturbances

===== PAGE 5 =====

Sensors 2018, 18, 3243 5 of 27
caused by large vehicles that move in neighboring trafﬁc lanes. The sensors have been connected
to create a sensor network. Measurement of vehicle speed in that network was based on evaluating
correlation between readings of the sensors, which are placed along the road. Methods of signal
analysis in frequency domain have been applied in order to calculate the correlation coefﬁcient in
real-time. During experiments the authors have achieved error of speed measurement below 2.5% for
vehicle speed in range between 18 and 90 km/h. Classiﬁcation of the vehicles was based on so-called
magnetic length and magnetic height. Length of vehicles was evaluated as the product of speed and
time in which a detection zone is occupied by a vehicle. The vehicle height was estimated by taking
into account readings of two sensors separated by a distance of 2.5 m. The developed sensor network
has enabled detection of turning vehicles at a crossroad with accuracy of 95%.
In another work along these lines [34] a sensor network was proposed, which enables counting and
classiﬁcation of vehicles. A sensor node was designed, which includes a magnetometer, accelerometer,
temperature sensors, GPS module and an IEEE 802.15.4 wireless communication interface. The task of
single sensor node is to detect and count vehicles in real-time. Detection algorithms were developed
that take into account compensation of temperature changes. The GPS module and T-sync algorithms
were utilized to synchronize the sensor nodes. This approach has enabled the sensor nodes to be
synchronized with nanosecond accuracy. Experimental results have revealed that the proposed sensor
network can achieve vehicle detection error below 1%. The accuracy of speed measurement was equal
to 96% (RMSE below 10 km/h). Production cost of the sensor node was estimated at 40$.
Portable anisotropic magneto-resistive sensors were applied for trafﬁc monitoring by Jinturkar
and Pawar [35]. During experiments a sensor network with four sensor nodes installed in road-side,
by a trafﬁc lane was tested. The authors demonstrated that their sensor network allows vehicle
classiﬁcation to be performed based on mean magnetic height and width. Speed of vehicles was
estimated by taking into account readings delivered by two neighboring sensor nodes. The wireless
communication between nodes was established by using Zigbee modules. The presented experimental
results conﬁrm that the magnetic sensors enable precise road trafﬁc measurements in variable
weather conditions.
More complex architecture of sensor node for trafﬁc monitoring was proposed in [36]. The sensor
node was equipped with an ATxmega128A4 microcontroller (Microchip Technology Inc., Chandler,
AZ, USA) and a set of sensors, i.e.,: magnetometer, accelerometer, humidity sensor, thermometer,
barometer, rain sensor, microphone, and light sensor. For experimental evaluation, the sensor nodes
were installed inside trafﬁc lanes. The data collected by magnetometer were utilized for vehicle
detection and classiﬁcation. During tests nine classes of vehicles have been successfully recognized
based on their magnetic signature. Moreover, additional tests were performed with sensor node placed
in road-side. The results have revealed that in case of sensor nodes located outside trafﬁc lanes, the
measurements of magnetic signature are signiﬁcantly distorted, which makes it difﬁcult to classify
the vehicles with high precision. For the sensors installed outside trafﬁc lane, it was also observed
that small vehicles (e.g., motorcycles) may be undetected. The authors have also analyzed the impact
of magnetometer orientation on the results of vehicle detection and classiﬁcation. It should be noted
that in the afore-mentioned solution, the sensor nodes were synchronized by using real-time clock and
GPS module.
The wireless nodes with magnetic sensors have been also applied for parking vehicle detection
in on-street parking [ 37]. The authors of that work have proposed vehicle detection and speed
measurement algorithms that are based on correlation analysis of sensor readings collected by
neighboring nodes. The experimental results have conﬁrmed that the proposed solution enables
detection of parking vehicles and speed estimation with accuracy of 99% and 92%, respectively.

===== PAGE 6 =====

Sensors 2018, 18, 3243 6 of 27
2.5. Ultrasonic and Microwave Radars
Radars are commonly used for vehicle detection. A vehicle detection method with use of ultrasonic
sensors was presented in [38]. Sensors of this kind are also used in vehicles for development of on-board
systems that enable detection of obstacles [39].
In [40] a micro-radar was presented for detection of bicycles. That micro-radar is installed in the
pavement, emits a high-frequency radio signal with low energy and measures the energy reﬂected
from a passing objects. A proﬁle of the reﬂected radio signal is analyzed. On this basis, the sensor
estimates size of passing objects and recognizes bicycles.
2.6. Acoustic Sensing
A vehicle detection system based on acoustic sensors was proposed in [ 41]. That system uses
a sensor unit, which consists in a pair of microphones deployed along the roadside. The detection
method utilizes the fact that sound of passing vehicle reaches the two microphones at slightly different
times. The time difference is estimated by computing cross-correlation of the microphone readings.
Peak of the cross-correlation function corresponds to position of the vehicle. Thus, that approach
enables determination of so-called sound map, which represents the vehicle motion along a predeﬁned
track. Details of this method are discussed in [42,43].
In [44] a method was presented for sound pattern classiﬁcation, which enables sound recognition
of heavy, medium, and light vehicles as well as horn. The underlying approaches to sound patterns
acquisition and separation are presented in [45].
Design and implementation of another acoustic system for road trafﬁc monitoring was described
in [46]. That system utilizes a grid of 37 microphones. It allows the measurement of trafﬁc parameters
to be performed for multiple trafﬁc lanes. Centers and edges of particular trafﬁc lanes in the monitored
area are recognized automatically. The measurements include vehicle counting and classiﬁcation as
well as estimation of average speed and lane occupancy. Two vehicle classes (long and short) were
considered during testes of the system. The class of vehicle was recognized by taking into account
occupancy time of a detection area. The test experiments have been conducted on a road with three
trafﬁc lanes. Counts of vehicles were determined with accuracy of 85%, however the error of vehicle
classiﬁcation have reached 90% for the long vehicles. The authors of that work have suggested that
better results could be obtained by using more sophisticated classiﬁers, e.g., decision trees or support
vector machines.
George et al. [47] have introduced a method for vehicle detection and classiﬁcation on the basis of
acoustic signal registered by a single microphone. In that method the vehicles are recognized with use
of k-NN and artiﬁcial neural networks classiﬁers. Input data of these classiﬁers include coefﬁcients
that describe the acoustic signal. A preprocessing procedure was implemented to reduce noise and
detect peaks of the analyzed signal. The method has enabled recognition of three vehicle classes,
i.e., heavy, medium, and light vehicles.
2.7. Sensor Fusion
Sensor fusion methods are used in several trafﬁc monitoring approaches to combine data from
multiple sensors of different type in order to detect vehicles and recognize their characteristics (speed,
class, etc.).
Data collected from accelerometers and magnetometers have been utilized for vehicle classiﬁcation
in [ 27,48]. Wenteng et al. [ 27] have introduced a prototype of vehicle classiﬁcation system,
which recognizes axle count and spacing. In that system, the accelerometers detect vehicle axles,
while the magnetometers report vehicle arrivals and departures and estimate their speed. The vehicles
were categorized into three classes (2-axle car, 3-axle car, and 5-axle heavy truck). Test results have
shown that the prototype is reliable in classifying vehicles with 99% accuracy.

===== PAGE 7 =====

Sensors 2018, 18, 3243 7 of 27
A method for determining vehicle speed and position based on fused measurements of
magnetometers and accelerometers was presented in [ 48]. The authors have shown that the
measurements of the two different sensors can be fused using the particle ﬁltering approach.
The performance of that method was veriﬁed by computer simulations. The results were compared
with accuracy of particle ﬁlters that process only measurements of one of the sensors. It was found that
the vehicle tracking system performs better when data from the two sensors are taken into account.
Fernández-Lozano et al. have presented a wireless sensor network, which utilizes data obtained
from Bluetooth nodes as well as from ultrasound and laser sensors to collect information about trip
origins and destinations for particular vehicles in a given urban area. The Bluetooth nodes enable
detection of Bluetooth devices installed in vehicles. According to that approach, the vehicles are
identiﬁed based on MAC addresses of the built-in Bluetooth devices. The ultrasound sensors were
implemented to detect the number of vehicles passing through the ultrasound beams. The vehicles
detection and counting functions are also supported by the data obtained from the laser sensors.
Accuracy of that system was demonstrated through experiments in real trafﬁc conditions.
2.8. Selection of Sensing Technologies
Based on the above literature survey, the usefulness of sensing technologies was evaluated with
regard to the cost, dimensions, energy, and portability requirements. Table 1 includes summarized
information about sensing technologies that are potentially useful in development of trafﬁc monitoring
systems. The sensors that fulﬁll all considered requirements were used during experiments to compare
their performance in trafﬁc monitoring applications. The experiments and their results are described in
the next sections. Table 2 shows the representative works for the selected technologies regarding their
goals, features, applications, and important ﬁndings. The most important advantages and limitations
of these technologies are summarized in Table 3.
Table 1. Usefulness of sensing technologies.
Sensing
Technology Principle of Operation Requirements
Cost Small
Dimensions
Energy
Consumption
Easy to
Install
Inductive loops Inductance measurement Low No High No
Cameras Image analysis High Yes High Yes
Magnetometers Magnetic ﬁeld measurement Low Yes Low Yes
Acoustic sensors Acoustic pressure
measurement Medium Yes Low Yes
Radars/LIDARs Detection of reﬂected
electromagnetic wave High No High Yes
Accelerometers Vibration measurement Medium Yes Low Yes
Light sensors Light intensity measurement Low Yes Low Yes
Passive infrared
sensors
Infrared radiation
measurement Medium Yes Low Yes
Ultrasonic sensors Detection of reﬂected sound
wave Low No Medium Yes
Wireless
communication
devices
Measurement of received
signal strength Low Yes Medium Yes

===== PAGE 8 =====

Sensors 2018, 18, 3243 8 of 27
Table 2. Representative works related to low-cost trafﬁc monitoring methods.
Study Application Data Source Description Important Findings Comments
Mao et al., 2013 [7] Object tracking Wireless network with 40
light sensors
Trajectories and speeds of
moving persons were
estimated in indoor
environment
Light sensor is sensitive to
change of the light level in
the environment even if
multiple light sources are
present.
Energy consumption is
high as dedicated light
sources are necessary.
Roy et al., 2011 [16] Detection of road
congestion
Wireless transmitter
-receiver pair
Free-ﬂowing and
congested trafﬁc states
were recognized based on
signal strength, link
quality and packet
reception metrics
Accuracy does not
depend on transmitter
power. Low accuracy is
obtained when
transmitter -receiver
distance is short (<20 m).
Individual vehicles were
not detected. Low-cost,
energy efﬁcient ZigBee
modules were
implemented.
Horvat et al., 2012 [15] Detection of vehicles Wireless transmitter
-receiver pair
The possibility of
detecting vehicles based
on RSSI measurements
was demonstrated
Pass of a vehicle causes
drop of RSSI value.
Gradient of the RSSI drop
depends on vehicle
velocity.
Accuracy of vehicle
detection was not
evaluated. Low-cost,
energy efﬁcient ZigBee
modules were
implemented.
Kassem et al., 2012 [17] Vehicle detection and
speed estimation
Wireless network with 2
transmitters and 2
receivers
Stopped and moving cars
were recognized based on
mean and variance of
RSSI. Relation between
RSSI variance and vehicle
speed was used for speed
estimation.
Presence of a vehicle
affects mean of RSSI. The
change of RSSI can be
negative or positive.
Variance of RSSI decreases
when vehicle speed
increases.
High accuracy of vehicle
detection was achieved
using a small dataset of 20
vehicles. WiFi devices
were implemented that
have high energy
consumption.
Won et al., 2017 [13]
Vehicle detection,
classiﬁcation, speed
estimation, and lane
recognition
Wireless transmitter
-receiver pair
CSI data were used to
detect vehicles, categorize
them as cars or trucks,
estimate their speeds and
recognize trafﬁc lane.
Number of CSI samples
collected while a vehicle
passes between
transmitter and receiver
can be used for estimation
of vehicle speed.Vehicles
on different lanes exhibit
distinct CSI distributions.
A large dataset was used
for experiments (400
vehicles).WiFi devices
were implemented that
have high energy
consumption.

===== PAGE 9 =====

Sensors 2018, 18, 3243 9 of 27
Table 2. Cont.
Haferkamp et al., 2017
[14]
Vehicle detection and
classiﬁcation
Wireless network with 3
transmitters and 3
receivers
RSSI data were used to
detected vehicles and
categorize them as cars or
trucks.
Ray tracing simulations are
helpful in classiﬁer training and
optimization of antenna
parameters.
High classiﬁcation
accuracy was achieved for
a large test dataset.The
use of directional
antennas increases
hardware cost.
Bernas et al., 2018 [20] Vehicle detection and
classiﬁcation
Wireless network with 4
transmitters and 4
receivers
RSSI data were used to
detected vehicles and
categorize them as cars,
semi trucks or trucks
Dependency exists between
height at which devices are
installed and the ability to detect
particular vehicle class.
High classiﬁcation
accuracy and low energy
consumption were
achieved by using
Bluetooth low energy
modules.
Mrazovac et al., 2013 [22] Human detection Wireless network with 4
transceivers
Human presence was
detected based on
frequency analysis of RSSI
variations.
Human presence can be detected
and distinguished from
background update via analysis
of RSSI variations.
Experiments were
conducted in indoor
environment.
Hostettler et al., 2011 [25] Vehicle detection Accelerometer
Passing vehicles were
detected in simulated and
real-world scenarios
Adaptive threshold detection
algorithm enables accurate
vehicle detection based on road
vibration measurements.
High accuracy was
achieved using real trafﬁc
data for 142 vehicles.
False detections can occur,
e.g., due to nearby
construction work.
Hostettler et al., 2012 [26]
Estimation of vehicle
speed, wheelbase, and
distance from road edge
Accelerometer
Speed of vehicle, its
wheelbase, and distance
from road edge was
estimated by using
extended Kalman ﬁlter.
Road surface vibrationsmeasured
by single accelerometer can be
used to track vehicles moving
along a straight road.
The results are presented
for two speciﬁc car
models. Small dataset was
used for testing. A
number of parameters
have to be predetermined.
Ma et al., 2014 [27] Vehicle classiﬁcation
Wireless sensor network
with 6 accelerometers and
3 magnetometers
Vehicles were categorized
into 3 classes based on
axle count and spacing.
Accelerometers can be used for
detecting axle locations.
Magnetometers enable estimating
vehicle speed and recognizing
gaps between vehicles.
Sensors are installed in
surface of trafﬁc lane. Tire
has to roll directly on top
of at least one
accelerometer. Short
battery lifetime.
Rivas et al., 2017 [29]
Vehicle detection,
recognition of driving
direction, speed
estimation
Sensor network with 4
accelerometers
Vehicles were detected
with accuracy of 80%.
Travel direction was
recognized with 90%
accuracy. Average speed
measurement error was of
27%
Frequency range of street
vibrations is between 250 Hz and
400 Hz. Sensors must have a
range at least of 1 kHz.
Sensors mounted on
roadside. Disadvantages
are large size and high
cost of sensors (>1000€
per unit). False detections
are caused by bicycles.

===== PAGE 10 =====

Sensors 2018, 18, 3243 10 of 27
Table 2. Cont.
Ghosh et al., 2015 [30] Vehicle detection Geophone and
seismometer
Vehicles were detected in
different scenarios: single
vehicle moving, multiple
vehicle moving, person
walking and running
nearby sensor.
The method is suitable for vehicle
detection in domain of defense
and perimeter monitoring.
The experiments were
conducted for three types
of vehicles: bus, tractor
and truck. Personal cars
were not considered.
Taghvaeeyan et al., 2014
[33]
Vehicle counting,
classiﬁcation, speed
estimation
Four anisotropic
magnetoresistive sensors
188 vehicles were
detected and classiﬁed.
Additionally, speed was
estimated and right turns
were recognized at
intersection.
Speed of vehicle can be estimated
based on cross-correlation
between signals from two sensors.
Classiﬁcation can be performed
based on magnetic length and
magnetic height of vehicles.
Four vehicle classes were
considered. Sensors are
placed on road side.
Precise time
synchronization of
sensors is required.
Balid et al., 2016 [34] Vehicle detection and
speed estimation
Wireless sensor network
with two magnetometers
One sensor was used for
vehicle detection.Speed
was calculated based on
travel time between
twolongitudinally
positioned sensor nodes
Variations of magnetic ﬂux for
sensors on road side are
relativelyuniform when
compared to sensors in trafﬁc
lane, which accounts for slightly
better accuracy.
The system can be
installed on surface of
trafﬁc lane or on road
side.GPS modules were
used for time
synchronization.
Jo et al., 2014 [38] Vehicle detection Ultrasonic sensor
Single sensor was
installed on road side to
detect vehicles in
two-lane road.
Ultrasonic sensors should only be
used on roads with few lanes and
moderate trafﬁc volume.
Vehicle detection across
multiple lanes with a
single roadside ultrasonic
sensor suffers a reduction
in detection accuracy
under dense trafﬁc ﬂow.
Volling 2013 [40] Bicycle detection Microwave radar
Tests with a small bicycle
have conﬁrmed high
accuracy of the detection.
Simple analysis of sensor
readings enables differentiating
bicycles from vehicles.
Radar has to be installed
in surface of the road.
Barbagli et al., 2011 [41] Vehicle detection and
speed estimation Pair of microphones
Prototype was tested on a
motorway. The collected
data include vehicle
counts and average
speeds.
For vehicle speed above 30 km/h,
the dominant sound sources are
tires. For stopped vehicles, the
dominant soundis motor noise.
This fact can be used for trafﬁc
jam detection.
Sensor node is installed
on the motorway’s
guardrail and powered by
rechargeable battery
assisted by solar panel.

===== PAGE 11 =====

Sensors 2018, 18, 3243 11 of 27
Table 2. Cont.
George et al., 2013 [44] Vehicle detection and
classiﬁcation Pair of microphones
Vehicles were detected
based on peaks of low
pass ﬁltered acoustic
energy. Neural network
was used to categorize
vehicles into 4 classes.
A peak ﬁnding algorithm for
vehicles detection was proposed.
Mel-frequency cepstral
coefﬁcients are useful for
audio-based vehicle classiﬁcation.
Low classiﬁcation
accuracy was achieved
(67%). Multilane trafﬁc
was not considered.
Impact of acceleration and
gear shift on classiﬁcation
needs further exploration.
Na et al., 2015 [46]
Vehicle detection,
classiﬁcation, speed
estimation, and lane
recognition.
Array of 37 microphones
Vehicles were detected in
3 trafﬁc lanes of a
highway. Two vehicle
classes were recognized
based on time taken to
pass detection zone.
Acceptable accuracy of vehicle
countingand speed estimation
can be achieved. High error rate
was encountered for lane
occupancy calculation and
vehicle classiﬁcation.
Microphone array has
large dimensions and
requires supporting
structures.

===== PAGE 12 =====

Sensors 2018, 18, 3243 12 of 27
Table 3. Advantages and limitations of low-cost sensing technologies for road trafﬁc monitoring.
Sensing Technology Advantages Limitations
Infrared and visible light sensors
• monitoring of multiple trafﬁc
lanes is possible
• enable pedestrian and
bicycle detection
• detection range is wide
• sensitive to light and
weather variations
• cleaning is necessary
Signal strength analysis in wireless
communication networks
• robust against light and
weather variations
• additional information can
be transmitted
• monitoring of multiple trafﬁc
lanes is possible
• devices have to be installed
on both sides of the road,
above road surface
• interference in ISM bands
Accelerometer applications
• robust against light and
weather variations
• enables wheelbase detection
and counting
• objects are not detected while
not moving
• sensitive to vibrations in
the environment
Magnetometer applications
• robust against light and
weather variations
• sensor has to be installed
inside or close to trafﬁc lane
• unable to detect
pedestrians/bicycles
Ultrasonic and microwave radars
• robust against light and
weather variations
• monitoring of multiple trafﬁc
lanes is possible
• provide speed information
• enable pedestrian and
bicycle detection
• wave-reﬂecting object has to
be present on opposite side
of the road
• Doppler sensors do not
detect stopped objects
Acoustic sensing
• robust against light and
weather variations
• monitoring of multiple trafﬁc
lanes is possible
• complex computations are
necessary to eliminate impact
of other sound sources
3. Experiments
Extensive experiments were conducted to compare effectiveness of different low-cost sensing
technologies in trafﬁc-monitoring applications. During experiments, two different models of sensor
node were utilized. An off-the-shelf smartphone (Redmi 3s, Xiaomi, Beijing, China) was adapted to
implement the ﬁrst model of sensor node (SN1), as presented in Figure 1. In order to collect the data
from built-in sensors of SN1, a mobile application was developed, which sends these data to server
for further analysis. The sensors available in SN1 are listed in Table 4. Additionally, the GPS module
of SN1 was used to precisely determine the time when sensor readings were collected. This function
enables synchronization of the datasets registered with use of multiple sensor nodes.
An extended set of sensors was installed in the second model of sensor node (SN2). The design of
SN2 is shown in Figure 2 and the installed sensors are listed in Table 5. The sensor type was selected
using a low cost threshold (10$ in case of passive sensors and 50$ active ones), low-cost sensors
that offer the best sensitivity were purchased. Therefore, some expensive solutions, e.g., directional

===== PAGE 13 =====

Sensors 2018, 18, 3243 13 of 27
microphones, high-end accelerometers and seismic sensors, were excluded from the analysis. The
presented construction of sensor node was based on results of preliminary experiments. During the
preliminary research various methods of sensor installation were considered. The most promising
options have been selected for the design of SN2.
Table 4. Built-in sensors of SN1.
Sensor Type Producer Model Sensitivity Range
Accelerometer/gyroscope Bosch BMI160 16384 LBS/g +/ −2 g
Magnetometer Yamaha YAS537 0.3 µT 2000 µT
Light sensor Liteon LTR55X 0.6 lux 10,000 lux
Microphone Xiaomi - - 40 Hz–48 kHz
Bluetooth module 1 Xiaomi BLE 4.1 - −100–0 dBm
1 used for measurement of RSSI.
Figure 1. First model of sensor node (SN1): (a) smartphone attached to aluminum plate; (b) placement
of the device during experiments.
The microwave radars (7644 HB100 and SEN0192) were placed in simple metal housings to reduce
the impact of objects or persons behind the node on sensor readings. Radar SEN0192 was directed
perpendicular to the axis of the road, while radar 7644 HB100 was oriented 45 degrees to this axis.
Despite using simple housing, the inﬂuence of an environment was still high, thus a dedicated cover
was designed for microwave radar HB100. The construction was presented in Figure 3. The dedicated
housing allows one to reduce the inﬂuence of background on the sensor readings and set direction of
the microwave beam. During experiments, it was noticed that the stable shield on the opposite road
side increases active sensors performance. Additionally, the angle between a metal object (e.g., vehicle)
and the sensor beam also inﬂuences the measurements.
Additional housing was also designed for the light sensor ISL2915 (Figure 4). A small hole was
drilled in the opaque housing to adjust the direction of light rays that are detected by the sensor.
This solution makes the sensor more sensitive to the changes of light intensity that are caused by
passing vehicles. The preliminary tests have shown that without the proposed housing, the vehicle
detection based on light sensor is impossible in bright sunlight.
Initial experiments were also performed to select appropriate installation method for vibration
sensors (accelerometers). These experiments have revealed that the measurement of vibrations on
road surface is more effective than the application of a bar stuck in the ground. Such observation is
consistent with the result reported in related literature. Therefore, the accelerometers were mounted
on a steel plate bolted to an aluminum proﬁle (5 m long, cross section of 20 × 20 mm). The proﬁle was
glued to the surface of the road, as shown in Figure 2.

===== PAGE 14 =====

Sensors 2018, 18, 3243 14 of 27
Figure 2. Second model of sensor node (SN2): (1) curb, (2) main box with microcontroller and
sensors, (3) ultrasonic sensor, (4) Doppler radar, (5) LIDAR, infrared sensor, and infrared camera,
(6) accelerometers, (7) aluminum proﬁle glued to the road surface.
Figure 3. Housing of Microwave Doppler radar HB100.
During experiments two SN1 nodes were placed on opposite sides of a trafﬁc lane. Distance
between the nodes was of 3.5 m. Sensor readings were collected from one of the nodes in time intervals
of 200 ms. The second node was used as a transmitter for the RSSI measurement. The time of car
detection events was registered by human observers, when vehicles were passing between the sensor
nodes. The events were also registered when no vehicle was present in vicinity of the sensor nodes. A
dedicated mobile application was used by the observers to collect the events.

===== PAGE 15 =====

Sensors 2018, 18, 3243 15 of 27
Figure 4. Housing of light sensor: (1) hole with diameter 3 mm, (2) sensor ISL2915.
Table 5. Sensors installed in SN2.
Model Sensor Type EnergyConsumption Precision Comments
SEN0158 Infrared camera 44 mA Range 0–3 m
DFR0052 Piezoelectric vibration sensor 0 - -
SEN-14032 LIDAR 130 mA +/ −25 cm Range 0–40 m
GP2Y0A710K0F Infrared distance measuring sensor 30 mA - Range 1–5.5 m
LOGO Sensor Accelerometer B/D - -
SEN-09198 Piezoelectric vibration sensor 0 +/ −1% -
MLX90614ESF Infrared sensor 1 mA +/ −0.5◦C -
7644 HB100 Microwave Doppler radar 30 mA - Range up to 20 m
7181 BH-1750 Light sensor 120 µA 20% -
SEN0171 Passive infrared sensor 15 µA - 7 m
BMP280 Barometer 2.7 µA ±0.12 hPa -
HMC5883L Magnetometer 100 µA 1 ◦ -
ISL29125 Light sensor 56 µA 300 lux -
LSM9DS1 Magnetometer, accelerometer, gyroscope 600 µA 1.13% -
SEN0192 Microwave doppler radar 37 mA - -
HC-SR501 Passive infrared sensor 65 mA - -
JSN-SR04T Ultrasonic distance sensor 30 mA 1 cm. -
ADXL355Z MEMS accelerometer 138 µA ±2 g–±8 g -
Similar experiments were performed with a single SN2 node. The SN2 node was placed on the
curb, as presented in Figure 2. In this case a car was parked on the opposite side of the road (in distance
of 5.5 m from SN2) to obtain stable reference values of the measurements made by the active sensors
(LIDAR, radar). The objective was to detect the vehicles passing between the SN2 node and the parked
car (shield). The measurement data from SN2 were acquired with different frequencies for particular
sensors. These frequencies were set according to speciﬁcations of the sensors.
Next part of the experiments with SN2 was devoted to vehicle localization in a detection area
with accuracy of 1 m. During these experiments the human observers have registered time of three
events: (1) vehicle enters detection area, (2) vehicle occupies half of the detection area, and (3) vehicle
reaches end of the detection area. Length o the detection area was 2 m. A schema of the localization
experiments is presented in Figure 5. The reference data, describing the aforementioned events, were
collected by two human observers. If an event was not conﬁrmed by two observers, then such event
was ignored. It should be also noted here that all the above discussed test scenarios for SN1 and SN2
were also used to examine the possibility of pedestrian detection.

===== PAGE 16 =====

Sensors 2018, 18, 3243 16 of 27
The objective of localization experiments was to explore the possibility of localizing vehicle or
pedestrian with use of the low-cost sensors that are originally designed for vehicle or pedestrian
detection. During these experiments it was veriﬁed if the sensors installed on road side, which detects
vehicles/pedestrians, can additionally recognize position of the detected target within detection area.
Thus, the localization is considered in this study as a supplementary function of the detectors. It should
be also noted here that vast amount of dedicated localization methods is available in the literature.
Some of them use the same sensor types as considered in this study but in different conﬁgurations
(e.g., radars installed on vehicle [49]). These dedicated localization methods are out of the scope of
this study.
Figure 5. Schema of vehicle localization experiments.
The data registered during measurements by each sensor in SN1 and SN2 were aggregated with
use of so-called sliding window [50]. According to this method, if a new sensor reading is registered
at time t, then the aggregation is performed on a set of data readings for which the registration
time t’ satisﬁes condition t − w ≤ t’ ≤ t, where w is size of the time window. Such set of sensor
readings is used to calculate aggregates (statistics) of the measured values, i.e., minimum, maximum,
median, average, and standard deviation. During initial research it was noticed that by increasing the
window size up to 1 s the detection accuracy was increased. However, if the window is wider than 1 s,
the measurements registered for two successive vehicles can be aggregated and the detection accuracy
decreases signiﬁcantly. Thus, the window size (w) of 1 s was used for further experiments.
The presence of an object (vehicle or pedestrian) in the detection area was recognized based
on the aggregated data, by using different machine learning methods, i.e., decision trees (DT),
k-nearest neighbors algorithm (KNN), and multi-layer perceptron neural network (MLP). The machine
learning methods were selected with regard to the computational requirements and possibility of
implementation in cheap, energy-efﬁcient software platforms.
The KNIME software with Weka tools [ 51,52] was used for classiﬁcation purposes. The DT
classiﬁer uses a C4.5 algorithm (gain ratio was used as quality measure without pruning) thus
no additional parameters has to be tuned. In case of MLP classiﬁer the RPROP implementation
of the multilayer feed-forward networks was used [ 51], which performs a local adaptation of the
weight-updates according to the behavior of the error function. Various structures of MLP were
considered with one and two hidden layers. The number of hidden neurons was between 10 and 20.
Each neuron had sigmoid activation function. The MLP structure with one hidden layer and 12 hidden
neurons was selected, based on results of cross validation obtained for 100 iterations. Finally, the k-NN
algorithm without weighting and linear search was used. Thus, only one parameter, i.e., the number o
neighbors (k) was tuned. Using the cross validation method, the optimal value of k parameter was
selected (k = 3). Sensor data collected for 60 events (passing vehicles/pedestrians) were used for

===== PAGE 17 =====

Sensors 2018, 18, 3243 17 of 27
training of the machine learning algorithms. The data used for parameter selection was excluded from
further evaluation process.
The machine learning algorithms were also applied for the localization problem to recognize three
locations of a vehicle/pedestrian, as shown in Figure 5.
During experiments, the machine learning algorithms were fed with three sets of the data
aggregates. The ﬁrst set of input data contained minimum, maximum, and median values. The second
set consisted of average and standard deviation. In the third case, the values of minimum, maximum,
average, and standard deviation are used. In order to evaluate accuracy of object detection,
the aggregated data from sensor nodes were divided into training dataset and test dataset in the
proportion of 60% to 40%. The detection (localization) accuracy was determined using the following
formula:
Accuracy = ∑n
i=1 Ci
S (1)
where: n—number of classes, Ci—number of items in the test dataset that are correctly assigned to i-th
class, and D—number of items in test dataset. It should be noted here that two classes ( n = 2) were
taken into account for the detection problem: (1) object present in the detection area, (2) no object in
the detection area. In case of the localization problem, four classes were considered (n = 4): (1) object
enters detection area, (2) object present in the detection area, (3) object reaches end of the detection area,
(4) none of the above. The use of the accuracy measure was motivated by the fact that the prepared
test dataset includes equal number of elements for each considered class.
4. Results and Discussion
The sensor data collected by SN1 were used to evaluate the accuracy of vehicle and pedestrian
detection. Table 6 shows the results that were obtained based on individual sensor readings with use
of DT algorithm. Input data of the algorithm have included four aggregates: minimum, maximum,
average, and standard deviation. The measurements collected by accelerometer, gyroscope and
magnetometer were analyzed separately for the three axes, while the remaining sensors provided
single value. It should be noted here that the accuracy values close to 50% can be obtained as
random results.
Table 6. Accuracy of object detection based on individual sensor readings from SN1.
Sensor Reading Object Detection Accuracy (%)
Vehicle Pedestrian (Walk) Pedestrian (Run)
Accelerometer x 46 64 49
Accelerometer y 46 63 57
Accelerometer z 58 58 57
Gyroscope x 40 53 70
Gyroscope y 44 49 59
Gyroscope z 49 49 34
Magnetometer x 93 49 52
Magnetometer y 61 47 52
Magnetometer z 83 42 48
Microphone 95 89 97
Light sensor 60 79 57
RSSI 85 42 43
During experiments with the standard off-the-shelf device (SN1) the high vehicle detection
accuracy was achieved by using microphone, wireless communication (RSSI), and magnetometer.
The accelerometer readings of SN1, due to sensor quality and type of the connection with surface,
were insufﬁcient to correctly recognize the vibrations. The vibrations were sufﬁciently detected only if
a pedestrian was walking very closely to the sensor node (changes of sensor readings were observed
for x and y axis). The data from gyroscope were characterized by strong noise, thus the results of

===== PAGE 18 =====

Sensors 2018, 18, 3243 18 of 27
classiﬁcation were signiﬁcantly affected. This effect can be observed for pedestrian run, where the
accuracy values for x and z axes are quite different. Magnetometer readings are not affected by
non-magnetic objects. Therefore, the magnetometer has provided accurate detection only for vehicles.
In this case the accuracy is above 80%, while accuracy of pedestrian detection is close to 50%. The best
results were obtained for x and z axis, thus at least those two should be considered to detect vehicles.
The fact that magnetometer readings are unaffected by pedestrians enables distinguishing pedestrians
from vehicles, when collecting data from several sensors.
Accurate results for both vehicles and pedestrians (accuracy over 90%) were obtained only with
use of a microphone. The sound of car as well as walking and running person was detected using
standard microphones installed in SM1. The sound of engines and running persons was easier to detect
than the sound of a walking person. Thus, 8% decrease of accuracy was noticed when comparing
the results obtained for walking person with those for running person. Finally, it should be noted
that the microphone readings can be affected by sound sources other than the objects to be detected,
e.g., vehicles in neighboring trafﬁc lanes. During measurements discussed in this Section, the other
sound sources were not present in vicinity of the sensor node.
The light sensor in SN1 was affected by sun reﬂections from vehicles and shadows of trees, thus
its accuracy for vehicle and running pedestrian detection was relatively low. Only in case of slowly
moving object (walking pedestrian) the light sensor was sufﬁcient to detect the object in most cases
(79% accuracy). Therefore, in SN2 the special housing was proposed and the data collection interval
was decreased to 100 ms for this sensor type.
The detection results obtained with use of RSSI data shows that the RSSI sampling rate of 5 Hz
allows us to detect vehicles with fair accuracy (85%). However, during experiments it was also
observed that the effectiveness of RSSI-based detection strongly depends on sampling rate and height
above road surface, at which the devices are installed. The detailed research results related to these
aspects were presented by the authors in [20].
A subset of the data collected during the experiments with SN1 is depicted by the scatter plots in
Figures 6 and 7. The values presented in that scatter plots are average sensor readings determined for
sliding window of 1 s. These charts allow us to compare the dispersion of measurement results for
sensors that have provided high accuracy of detection. Additionally, the accelerometer was considered,
as one of the sensors that have been used for vehicle detection in previous works.
Figure 6. Comparison of measurements collected by SN1 for vehicle presence and absence.

===== PAGE 19 =====

Sensors 2018, 18, 3243 19 of 27
Figure 7. Comparison measurements collected by SN1 for pedestrian presence and absence.
The above discussed results show that for individual sensors there is no clear separation between
the readings registered when a vehicle is present in the detection area and those collected in case of
empty detection area, thus the data from multiple sensors should be considered.
SN1 was also used to measure sound level in a four-lane road with high trafﬁc intensity.
In this case a signiﬁcant background noise was caused by the vehicles in neighboring trafﬁc lanes.
The measurements were analyzed in frequency domain to verify the possibility of detecting vehicles.
The objective was to recognize the vehicles passing in the right-most trafﬁc lane (SN1 was placed on the
right side of the road). Sound spectra for three vehicle classes and for background noise are presented
in Figure 8. Each chart in Figure 8 shows the spectra for 20 samples registered in real trafﬁc conditions.
The sound spectra for vehicles of the same class as well as for the background vary signiﬁcantly. Thus,
it is impossible to distinguish between vehicle and background for a large part of the analyzed samples.
These results show that the accurate vehicle detection with use of microphones requires more complex
data, e.g., sound levels measured by microphones placed in different lanes.
Figure 8. Sound spectra for vehicles of different classes and for background noise.

===== PAGE 20 =====

Sensors 2018, 18, 3243 20 of 27
As mentioned above, the experiments with SN1 nodes were also performed in urban road during
periods of high trafﬁc intensity, when time headways between vehicles were small and other vehicles
were passing in adjacent trafﬁc lane. It was observed that for such conditions higher detection accuracy
can be achieved by decreasing the size of the aggregation window. Further improvement would be
also possible after implementation of the methods from the literature that deals with the problem
of multiple vehicles present in the detection area. Different methods are available for particular
sensor types, e.g., for microphones [44] and magnetometers [33]. In this study such methods were not
applied as the objective was to compare the effectiveness of different sensors in similar settings, using
algorithms that have low computational complexity and can be implemented in cheap, energy-efﬁcient
hardware platforms.
Further tests were performed to check the possibility of improving the vehicle detection accuracy
by combining the data collected from different sensors available in SN1. Two datasets were taken
into account, selected based on the results presented in Table 6. The ﬁrst (full) dataset consists
of data readings from magnetometer (for three axes), microphone, and RSSI values. The second
dataset contains magnetometer data (for axes axes) and RSSI values. The microphone readings were
not considered in this dataset as they can be affected by presence of other strong sound sources,
as explained above.
The vehicle detection accuracy for the two datasets is compared in Table 7. The results in Table 7
are presented for two different sets of the aggregates and three classiﬁcation algorithms. It should
be noted that the sets of aggregates considered in this case include less elements than the set, which
was used to collect the result presented in Table 6. The set of aggregates was selected as giving
the highest accuracy values. In majority of cases, with exception of MLP algorithm and reduced
dataset, the average and standard deviation aggregates provided better or the same results as median,
minimum and maximum aggregates. An important observation is that 100% accuracy of the detection
can be achieved by taking into account the three sensors (magnetometer, microphone, and wireless
module measuring RSSI). Thus, the sensor fusion has enabled improvement of the detection accuracy
in comparison with the results achieved for individual sensors. The improvement was possible despite
the fact that the set of aggregates was reduced. The worse result of MLP algorithm could be caused by
the ﬁxed neural network size, selected during initial research, as well as by limitations of the training
procedure, which was used to adjust the weights of inter-neuron connections. In case of MLP algorithm
both the network structure parameters as well as the weights have to be tuned. The large number of
parameters and low number of iterations can give semi-optimal result. Therefore, 10 training sessions
were conducted and average results are presented in this Section. The DT and KNN algorithms have
achieved 100% accuracy. It should be noted that those two algorithms do not have to use all input data
for decision making, thus they are less affected by outliers. In practice the DT algorithm can make the
decision based on single attribute, if the selected attribute is sufﬁcient. Additional advantage of DT
over KNN is lower memory utilization. The DT in contrast to KNN does not have to store the training
database in the memory.
Table 7. Accuracy of vehicle detection based on combined sensor readings from SN1.
Dataset Algorithm Aggregates Vehicle Detection Accuracy (%)
Full
DT average, standard deviation 100
median, minimum, maximum 100
KNN average, standard deviation 100
median, minimum, maximum 100
MLP average, standard deviation 92
median, minimum, maximum 77
Without sound
DT average, standard deviation 88
median, minimum, maximum 85
KNN average, standard deviation 94
median, minimum, maximum 94
MLP average, standard deviation 82
median, minimum, maximum 85

===== PAGE 21 =====

Sensors 2018, 18, 3243 21 of 27
A decrease of detection accuracy was experienced when taking into account the second dataset
without microphone readings. In this case the accuracy was only slightly better than that achieved
for individual sensor (magnetometer). When comparing the considered machine learning algorithms,
it can be observed that MLP gives worse results than DT and KNN. The reduction of input dataset has
inﬂuenced the results of DT algorithm. Nevertheless, the DT algorithm managed to retain the high
detection accuracy (88%).
Another observation is that two aggregates, i.e., average and standard deviation, were sufﬁcient
to accurately detect vehicles. The accuracy achieved for the experiments without sound varies in range
of 3% for the considered sets of aggregates. All three compared algorithms have their advantages.
The decision-making procedures of MLP and DT algorithms can be implemented in sensor node,
due to low computational complexity and memory requirements. In contrast, the KNN algorithm
has signiﬁcantly higher requirements related to computations and memory resources. Therefore,
for further tests the DT algorithm was used as giving the most stable results (unaffected by parameters
tuning).
Similar research and analysis were conducted using the SN2 node. Results of vehicle and
pedestrian detection based on data delivered by individual sensors in SN2 are presented in Table 8.
The detection and localization tasks were performed with use of DT algorithm. Input datasets of
the DT algorithm have consisted of minimum, maximum, average, and standard deviation values
determined for sensor readings within sliding window. Results of these experiments show that
vehicles were accurately detected with use of magnetometer and light sensor. For magnetometer the
high accuracy is achieved provided that the vehicles pass close to the sensor location. The detection
accuracy drops signiﬁcantly if the distance between magnetometer and vehicle is above 2 m. Examples
of magnetometer readings are presented in Figure 9. The time intervals, during which a car was
close to the sensor, are marked as red circles. Minimum distances between the car and the sensor are
presented above the charts.
Figure 9. Readings of magnetometer for various distances between vehicle and sensor.
In case of magnetometer, the detection accuracy decreases with increasing distance between
the sensor and vehicles (see Figure 9). A similar effect was observed for the majority of the passive

===== PAGE 22 =====

Sensors 2018, 18, 3243 22 of 27
sensors, including the light sensor and accelerometer. Thus, the placement of passive sensors is a
key factor. Light sensors achieve a high detection accuracy during sunny days, under stable ambient
lighting conditions. It should be noted that the results were improved in comparison with those of
SN1 by using the housing presented in Figure 4, which allows the light sensor to be appropriately
oriented. For such conditions vehicles and pedestrians can be detected in distance of 4 m. In such
settings, the detection accuracy for light sensor was increased to 95%. However, in case of dynamic
lighting changes, e.g., during cloudy weather, the detection accuracy is signiﬁcantly lower (equals
60%). Nevertheless, the analysis of light sensor readings can help in detecting the changes generated
by environment and those related to moving object close to the sensor.
An example of the signal registered by light sensor is presented in Figure 10. The changes of
light value in case of passing vehicle are more rapid than in background. The color of a vehicle also
inﬂuences the light sensor readings: the registered value can decrease or increase when vehicle is
present in front of the sensor.
Figure 10. Readings of light sensor.
Table 8. Accuracy of object detection based on individual sensors in SN2.
Sensor Detection Accuracy (%) Comments
Vehicle Pedestrian
Accelerometer 60 64 Enables detection of heavy vehicles. Needs to be
bonded to road surface.
Magnetometer 93 49 Detects vehicles in range of 2 m. Does not efﬁciently
detect pedestrians.
Light sensor 60–95 60–85 Detects objects in range of 4 m. Sensitive to ambient
lighting conditions and sensor orientation.
Passive infrared sensor 39 69 Low detection accuracy for both vehicles and
pedestrians. Detection range limited to 1 m.
Infrared distance measuring sensor 80 76 Detection range up to 5 m. The object must cut the
narrow beam otherwise will not be detected.
LIDAR 83 78 Detection range up to 5 m.
Piezoelectric vibration sensor 50 50 Low detection accuracy for both vehicles and
pedestrians.
Barometer 52 50 Low detection accuracy for both vehicles and
pedestrians. Detection range limited to 50cm.
Microwave Doppler radar (SEN0192) 76 69 Directed perpendicular to road axis. Detection range
up to 5 m.
Microwave Doppler radar(7644 HB100)
without housing 41 44 Oriented 45 degrees to road axis. Difﬁcult to tune and
conﬁgure.
Microwave Doppler radar(7644 HB100)
with housing 81 79 Installed 2 m above a road/sidewalk.

===== PAGE 23 =====

Sensors 2018, 18, 3243 23 of 27
During experiments, the accelerometers enabled accurate detection of heavy vehicles (trucks).
However, personal cars were not correctly detected using this type of sensor. The results achieved with
use of the LSM9DS1 accelerometer are better than those obtained for the remaining accelerometers
installed in SN2. The accuracy of accelerometer-based detection strongly depends on sensor sensitivity,
type of the road, and type of the sensor mounting. In comparison to the results presented in [ 25],
the sensitivity of the analyzed sensors was lower. Thus, a more precise accelerometer can be used to
improve the detection accuracy. Based on the literature [ 23], it was expected that the piezoelectric
sensor will provide useful data for vehicle/pedestrian detection. However, the experiments did not
conﬁrm that assumption. The low detection accuracy observed for the piezoelectric sensor could
be caused by the type of its installation. The results can be also improved for this sensor by using
a pre-ampliﬁer.
The LIDAR proved to be useful sensor for vehicle detection, provided that a shield is used,
as shown in Figure 5. LIDAR could be also installed over the trafﬁc lanes at some height. However,
without an object (or shield) present in sensing range it losses stability and becomes ineffective. During
research in real-trafﬁc conditions it was noticed that narrow LIDAR detection beam could be avoided
by vehicles if the trafﬁc lane is wide.
The research has also covered the test of barometer, which proved to be effective if distance
to the target object is short—up to 0.5 m. However, the barometer loses its applicability in case of
strong wind or when closed in a cover. Finally, the microwave radars are able to detect moving
object, however without a dedicated design of housing they collect the noise from surroundings.
Therefore, a special housing was proposed to improve the accuracy of microwave radar (Figure 3).
The results obtained with use of the proposed housing show improvement, in case of both vehicles
and pedestrians detection.
Comments related to each type of the sensors are summarized in Table 8.A general observation is
that high detection accuracy cannot be achieved with use of individual sensors for all considered situations.
Before selecting subsets of sensors for further tests, the relation between their data readings
was examined with use of Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcient. The readings for X and Z axis of the
magnetometer showed strong correlation (−0.98), thus in applications only one axis can be considered.
Similar relation was observed for R, G, B values registered by the light sensor (0.97). The high
correlation was also observed for accelerometer and light sensor (0.8). Finally, weak correlation was
noticed between light sensor, accelerometer and LIDAR readings, where the correlation coefﬁcient
equals 0.85 and 0.91, respectively.
Despite the aforementioned dependencies, the full set of sensor readings was initially used for
detection of objects. Table 9 presents the accuracy of vehicle detection and localization, which was
obtained by using different subsets of the sensors available in SN2. The results of pedestrian detection
and localization are shown in Table 10. In Tables 9 and 10 three categories of sensor sets are
distinguished: sets containing only passive sensors, sets of active sensors, and sets that comprise both
passive and active sensors. For the passive and active sensor categories full set of the considered
sensors is presented in the ﬁrst row. The detection accuracy was tested using all possible subsets of
the sensors. The subsets that have provided high detection and localization accuracy are included
in Tables 9 and 10. In case of the last category, which combines passive sensors with active sensors,
the results are presented for the subset that contains the lowest number of sensors and achieves the
highest accuracy.
The results in Tables 9 and 10 clearly show that high detection accuracy can be achieved by using
the active sensors as well as the passive sensors. Vehicles were correctly detected (98% accuracy)
based on data from three sensors: magnetometer, accelerometer, and light sensor. The same result was
obtained in case of magnetometer and light sensor. However, the localization accuracy was decreased
in that case. Addition of the other sensors did not improve the accuracy of vehicle detection. The best
results regarding vehicle localization (in the passive sensors category) were observed for the sensor
set consisting of magnetometer, accelerometer and vibration sensor. However, these results are not

===== PAGE 24 =====

Sensors 2018, 18, 3243 24 of 27
satisfactory, since the localization accuracy did not exceed 72%. The combination of passive and active
sensors has improved these results only by 1%. This value shows that the range of passive sensors is
limited as mentioned above.
In case of pedestrian detection (Table 10) the active sensors performed better than the passive
sensors. The best result (95% accuracy) was obtained by using microwave radar and LIDAR. For
passive sensor set (accelerometer, light sensor, and PIR) the detection accuracy reached 89%. The
results show that correct localization of pedestrians cannot be obtained when using only one sensor
node. Therefore, for localization purposes of pedestrians and vehicles a sensor network with multiple
sensor nodes installed along the road would be recommended. It should be also kept in mind that
dedicated localization methods, which can provide better accuracy, were not considered in this study,
as it is focused on the portable, easy to install, low-cost solutions.
Table 9. Accuracy of vehicle detection and localization based on combined sensor readings from SN2.
Sensors Accuracy (%)
Localization Detection
Passive sensors
accelerometer, light sensor, vibration sensor, magnetometer, PIR, barometer 64 98
magnetometer, light sensor 69 98
accelerometer, vibration sensor, magnetometer, PIR, barometer 68 98
accelerometer, vibration sensor, magnetometer, PIR 68 98
accelerometer, vibration sensor, magnetometer 72 97
accelerometer, magnetometer, light sensor 71 98
Active sensors
ultrasonic sensor, microwave radar, LIDAR, infrared camera 57 97
microwave radar, LIDAR, infrared camera 58 97
ultrasonic sensor, microwave radar, LIDAR 49 97
Passive and active sensors
accelerometer, vibration sensor, magnetometer, microwave radar 73 98
Table 10. Accuracy of pedestrian detection and localization based on combined sensor readings
from SN2.
Sensors Accuracy (%)
Localization Detection
Passive sensors
accelerometer, light sensor, vibration sensor, magnetometer, PIR, barometer 58 84
accelerometer, light sensor, PIR 59 89
light sensor, PIR 60 88
Active sensors
ultrasonic sensor, microwave radar, LIDAR, infrared camera 45 94
ultrasonic sensor, microwave radar, LIDAR 45 94
microwave radar, LIDAR 49 95
Passive and active sensors
microwave radar, LIDAR, light sensor, PIR 66 95
The experimental results show that type of the housing as well as position of sensor inﬂuences
the readings and detection accuracy. Data readings of LIDAR, light sensor or PIR are inﬂuenced by the
housing and its orientation. The barometer was useful, while installed without any cover.
The RSSI value depends strongly on sensor position: it increases when sensors are installed over
50 cm above pavement and decreases when sensors are situated on the ground. It was also observed
that the magnetometer readings were useful if a distance to the detected object was lower than 2 m.
Finally, the accelerometer has to be ﬁrmly glued with the surface to provide useful measurements.

===== PAGE 25 =====

Sensors 2018, 18, 3243 25 of 27
5. Conclusions
Low-cost sensors from state-of-art approaches were selected and their usefulness was veriﬁed
for vehicle/pedestrian detection system applications. The sensors considered in this study do not
enable detecting vehicles and pedestrians with high accuracy when used independently. The detection
accuracy can be signiﬁcantly improved by fusing data from an appropriately selected set of sensors.
During the experiments reported in this paper various sensor sets were analyzed. The experimental
results show that accurate vehicle detection can be achieved by using sets of passive sensors.
For instance, the vehicles can be detected with 98% accuracy based of dataset containing magnetometer
and light sensor readings. In case of pedestrian detection, application of active sensors (microwave
radar, LIDAR) was necessary to obtain satisfactory results.
Vehicle and pedestrian localization tasks are also covered by the experimental evaluation
presented in this paper as a supplementary function of the low-cost detectors. The objective was to
recognize objects’ location with precision of 1 m using the same sensor node as for the detection
experiments. The sensor node was installed on road side, in the center of the detection area.
The localization accuracy achieved by single sensor node was below 75% for vehicles and 70%
for persons. In order to improve the localization accuracy, it would be necessary to collect the
measurements from more than one sensor node. Therefore, further research will be performed with
wireless sensor network composed of multiple sensor nodes installed along the road. The sensor
network is also expected to recognize direction and estimate speed of the trafﬁc participants.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, M.B.; Methodology, M.B.; Software, B.P ., P .L., P .S, and J.S.; Validation,
P .L., P .S, and W.K..; Formal Analysis, B.P ., P .L. and P .S; Investigation, M.B., P .L., P .S, J.S, W.K and B.P .; Resources,
B.P .; Data Curation, B.P .; Writing-Original Draft Preparation, M.B. and B.P .; Writing-Review & Editing, M.B. and
B.P .; Visualization, J.S. and B.P; Supervision, M.B.; Project Administration, M.B.; Funding Acquisition, M.B.
Funding: This research was funded the National Centre for Research and Development (NCBR) Grant No.
LIDER/18/0064/L-7/15/NCBR/2016.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Placzek, B. A self-organizing system for urban trafﬁc control based on predictive interval microscopic model.
Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 2014, 34, 75–84. [CrossRef]
2. Datondji, S.R.E.; Dupuis, Y.; Subirats, P .; Vasseur, P . A survey of vision-based trafﬁc monitoring of road
intersections. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 2016, 17, 2681–2698. [CrossRef]
3. Tian, B.; Morris, B.T.; Tang, M.; Liu, Y.; Yao, Y.; Gou, C.; Shen, D.; Tang, S. Hierarchical and Networked
Vehicle Surveillance in ITS: A Survey.IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 2015, 16, 557–580.
4. Shirazi, M.S.; Morris, B.T. Looking at intersections: A survey of intersection monitoring, behavior and safety
analysis of recent studies. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 2017, 18, 4–24. [CrossRef]
5. Nellore, K.; Hancke, G. A survey on urban trafﬁc management system using wireless sensor networks.
Sensors 2016, 16, 157. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6. Dollar, P .; Wojek, C.; Schiele, B.; Perona, P . Pedestrian detection: An evaluation of the state of the art.
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 2012, 34, 743–761. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7. Mao, X.; Tang, S.; Wang, J.; Li, X.Y. iLight: Device-free passive tracking using wireless sensor networks.
IEEE Sens. J. 2013, 13, 3785–3792. [CrossRef]
8. Rüfenacht, D.; Fredembach, C.; Süsstrunk, S. Automatic and accurate shadow detection using near-infrared
information. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 2014, 36, 1672–1678. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9. Gade, R.; Moeslund, T.B. Thermal cameras and applications: A survey. Mach. Vis. Appl. 2014, 25, 245–262.
[CrossRef]
10. Sanchez, G.H.; Saito, M.; Schultz, G.G.; Eggett, D.L. Use of High-Resolution Data to Evaluate the Accuracy
of Mean and 85th Percentile Approach Speeds Collected By Microwave Sensors. In Proceedings of the
Transportation Research Board 96th Annual Meeting (TRB), Washington, DC, USA, 8–12 January 2017;
pp. 1–17.

===== PAGE 26 =====

Sensors 2018, 18, 3243 26 of 27
11. Krotosky, S.J.; Trivedi, M.M. On color-, infrared-, and multimodal-stereo approaches to pedestrian detection.
IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 2007, 8, 619–629. [CrossRef]
12. Tian, Y.; Liu, H.; Furukawa, T. Reliable Infrastructural Urban Trafﬁc Monitoring via Lidar and Camera
Fusion. SAE Int. J. Passenger Cars-Electr. Electr. Syst. 2017, 10, 173–180. [CrossRef]
13. Won, M.; Zhang, S.; Son, S.H. WiTrafﬁc: Low-cost and non-intrusive trafﬁc monitoring system using WiFi.
In Proceedings of the 2017 26th International Conference on Computer Communication and Networks
(ICCCN), Vancouver, BC, Canada, 31 July–3 August 2017; pp. 1–9.
14. Haferkamp, M.; Al-Askary, M.; Dorn, D.; Sliwa, B.; Habel, L.; Schreckenberg, M.; Wietfeld, C. Radio-based
trafﬁc ﬂow detection and vehicle classiﬁcation for future smart cities. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE 85th
Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC Spring), Sydney, Australia, 4–7 June 2017; pp. 1–5.
15. Horvat, G.; Šoštari´ c, D.; Žagar, D. Using radio irregularity for vehicle detection in adaptive roadway
lighting. In Proceedings of the MIPRO, 2012 Proceedings of the 35th International Convention, Opatija,
Croatia, 21–25 May 2012; pp. 748–753.
16. Roy, S.; Sen, R.; Kulkarni, S.; Kulkarni, P .; Raman, B.; Singh, L.K. Wireless across road: RF based road trafﬁc
congestion detection. In Proceedings of the 2011 Third International Conference on Communication Systems
and Networks (COMSNETS), Bangalore, India, 4–8 January 2011; pp. 1–6.
17. Kassem, N.; Kosba, A.E.; Youssef, M. RF-based vehicle detection and speed estimation. In Proceedings of the
2012 IEEE 75th Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC Spring), Yokohama, Japan, 6–9 May 2012; pp. 1–5.
18. Li, X.; Wu, J. A new method and veriﬁcation of vehicles detection based on RSSI variation. In Proceedings of
the 2016 10th International Conference on Sensing Technology (ICST), Nanjing, China,11–13 November 2016;
pp. 1–6.
19. Mestre, P .; Guedes, R.; Couto, P .; Matias, J.; Fernandes, J.; Serodio, C. Vehicle detection for outdoor car parks
using IEEE 802.15. 4. In Proceedings of the World Congress on Engineering 2013 Vol II (WCE), London, UK,
3–5 July 2013; pp. 1–6.
20. Bernas, M.; Płaczek, B.; Korski, W. Wireless Network with Bluetooth Low Energy Beacons for Vehicle
Detection and Classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Networks
(CN 2018), Gliwice, Poland, 19–22 June 2018; pp. 429–444.
21. Lewandowski, M.; Płaczek, B.; Bernas, M.; Szymała, P . Road Trafﬁc Monitoring System Based on Mobile
Devices and Bluetooth Low Energy Beacons. Wireless Commun. Mob. Comput. 2018, 2018. [CrossRef]
22. Mrazovac, B.; Todorovi´ c, B.; Bjelica, M.; Kukolj, D. Device-free indoor human presence detection method
based on the information entropy of RSSI variations. Electron. Lett. 2013, 49, 1386–1388. [CrossRef]
23. Lombaert, G.; Degrande, G. The experimental validation of a numerical model for the prediction of the
vibrations in the free ﬁeld produced by road trafﬁc.J. Sound Vibr. 2003, 262, 309–331. [CrossRef]
24. Profaska, M.; G óra, M. Badania emisji drga ´ n z ci ˛ agu komunikacyjnego–studium przypadku.Systemy
Wspomagania w In˙zynierii Produkcji 2013, 3, 154–167.
25. Hostettler, R.; Birk, W. Analysis of the adaptive threshold vehicle detection algorithm applied to
trafﬁc vibrations. In Proceedings of the Proceedings of the 18th IFAC World Congress, Milano, Italy,
28 August–2 September 2011; p. 100.
26. Hostettler, R.; Birk, W.; Nordenvaad, M.L. Extended Kalman ﬁlter for vehicle tracking using road surface
vibration measurements. In Proceedings of the 2012 IEEE 51st Annual Conference on Decision and Control
(CDC), Maui, HI, USA, 10–13 December 2012; pp. 5643–5648.
27. Ma, W.; Xing, D.; McKee, A.; Bajwa, R.; Flores, C.; Fuller, B.; Varaiya, P . A wireless accelerometer-based
automatic vehicle classiﬁcation prototype system. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 2014, 15, 104–111.
[CrossRef]
28. Hostettler, R.; Birk, W.; Nordenvaad, M.L. Feasibility of road vibrations-based vehicle property sensing.
IET Intell. Transp. Syst. 2010, 4, 356–364. [CrossRef]
29. Rivas, J.; Wunderlich, R.; Heinen, S.J. Road vibrations as a source to detect the presence and speed of vehicles.
IEEE Sens. J. 2017, 17, 377–385. [CrossRef]
30. Ghosh, R.; Akula, A.; Kumar, S.; Sardana, H. Time–frequency analysis based robust vehicle detection using
seismic sensor. J. Sound Vibr. 2015, 346, 424–434. [CrossRef]
31. ZHANG, L.-T.; WU, W.-L.; WANG, P . Real-time Trafﬁc Monitoring with Magnetic Sensor Networks.J. Inf.
Sci. Eng. 2010, 26, 1539–1552.

===== PAGE 27 =====

Sensors 2018, 18, 3243 27 of 27
32. Velisavljevic, V .; Cano, E.; Dyo, V .; Allen, B. Wireless Magnetic Sensor Network for Road Trafﬁc Monitoring
and Vehicle Classiﬁcation.Transp. Telecommun. 2016, 17, 274. [CrossRef]
33. Taghvaeeyan, S.; Rajamani, R. Portable roadside sensors for vehicle counting, classiﬁcation, and speed
measurement. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 2014, 15, 73–83. [CrossRef]
34. Balid, W.; Taﬁsh, H.; Refai, H.H. Versatile real-time trafﬁc monitoring system using wireless smart sensors
networks. In Proceedings of the Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC), Doha,
Qatar, 3–6 April 2016; pp. 1–6.
35. Jinturkar, S.; Pawar, S. Vehicle Detection and Parameter Measurement using Smart Portable Sensor System.
Commun. Appl. Electron. 2016, 4, 5–9. [CrossRef]
36. Balid, W.; Taﬁsh, H.; Refai, H.H. Development of portable wireless sensor network system for real-time trafﬁc
surveillance. In Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE 18th International Conference on Intelligent Transportation
Systems (ITSC), Las Palmas, Spain, 15–18 September 2015; pp. 1630–1637.
37. Zhu, H.; Yu, F. A cross-correlation technique for vehicle detections in wireless magnetic sensor network.
IEEE Sens. J. 2016, 16, 4484–4494. [CrossRef]
38. Jo, Y.; Jung, I. Analysis of Vehicle Detection with WSN-Based Ultrasonic Sensors. Sensors 2014,
14, 14050–14069. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
39. Liu, J.; Han, J.; Lv, H.; Li, B. An Ultrasonic Sensor System Based on a Two-Dimensional State Method for
Highway Vehicle Violation Detection Applications. Sensors 2015, 15, 9000–9021. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
40. Volling, M.T. A New Solution to the Growing Problem of Bicycle Detection. IMSA J. 2013, 51, 56–60.
41. Barbagli, B.; Bencini, L.; Magrini, I.; Manes, G.; Manes, A.; Srl, N. A trafﬁc monitoring and queue detection
system based on an acoustic sensor network. Int. J. Adv. Netw. Serv. 2011, 4, 27–37.
42. Forren, J.F.; Jaarsma, D. Trafﬁc monitoring by tire noise. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Intelligent
Transportation System, Boston, MA, USA, 12 November 1997; pp. 177–182.
43. Ding, J.; Cheung, S.-Y.; Tan, C.-W.; Varaiya, P . Signal processing of sensor node data for vehicle detection.
In Proceedings of the 7th International IEEE Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems, Washington,
WA, USA, 3–6 October 2004; pp. 70–75.
44. George, J.; Cyril, A.; Koshy, B.I.; Mary, L. Exploring sound signature for vehicle detection and classiﬁcation
using ANN. Int. J. Soft Comput. 2013, 4, 29. [CrossRef]
45. Mediante, E.C.; Haddad, K.; Song, W.; Chauhan, S.; Valero, X. A method for recognition of coexisting
environmental sound sources based on the Fisher’s linear discriminant classiﬁer. In Proceedings of the
INTER-NOISE 2013, Innsbruck, Austria, 15–18 October 2013; pp. 1–10.
46. Na, Y.; Guo, Y.; Fu, Q.; Yan, Y. An acoustic trafﬁc monitoring system: Design and implementation.
In Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE 12th Intl Conf on Ubiquitous Intelligence and Computing and 2015 IEEE
12th Intl Conf on Autonomic and Trusted Computing and 2015 IEEE 15th Intl Conf on Scalable Computing
and Communications and Its Associated Workshops (UIC-ATC-ScalCom), Beijing, China, 10–14 August
2015; pp. 119–126.
47. George, J.; Mary, L.; Riyas, K. Vehicle detection and classiﬁcation from acoustic signal using ANN and KNN.
In Proceedings of the 2013 International Conference on Control Communication and Computing (ICCC),
Thiruvananthapuram, India, 13–15 December 2013; pp. 436–439.
48. Hostettler, R.; Djuri´ c, P .M. Vehicle tracking based on fusion of magnetometer and accelerometer sensor
measurements with particle ﬁltering. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.2015, 64, 4917–4928. [CrossRef]
49. Ward, E.; Folkesson, J. Vehicle localization with low cost radar sensors. In Proceedings of the Intelligent
Vehicles Symposium (IV), Dearborn, MI, USA, 19–22 June 2016.
50. Aggarwal, C.C. Data Mining: The Textbook; Springer: New York, NY, USA, 2015.
51. Berthold, M.R.; Cebron, N.; Dill, F.; Gabriel, T.R.; Kötter, T.; Meinl, T.; Ohl, P .; Thiel, K.; Wiswedel, B.
KNIME-the Konstanz information miner: Version 2.0 and beyond. AcM SIGKDD Explor. Newsl. 2009,
11, 26–31. [CrossRef]
52. Hall, M.; Frank, E.; Holmes, G.; Pfahringer, B.; Reutemann, P .; Witten, I.H. The WEKA data mining software:
An update. ACM SIGKDD Explor. Newsl. 2009, 11, 10–18. [CrossRef]
© 2018 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).