

===== PAGE 1 =====

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 12, NO. 2, JUNE 2011 615
Short Papers
EasiTia: A Pervasive Trafﬁc Information Acquisition
System Based on Wireless Sensor Networks
Rui Wang, Member , IEEE, Lei Zhang, Rongli Sun,
Jibing Gong, and Li Cui, Member , IEEE
Abstract—Trafﬁc information acquisition is often implemented by video
cameras or inductive loops, which is expensive or inconvenient from
installation and maintenance perspectives. We designed and implemented
a pervasive trafﬁc information acquisition system based on wireless sensor
networks called EasiTia. Unlike existing solutions, the implementation of
the system does not require extra devices in the road infrastructure or
vehicle, nor the excavation of the road surfaces. EasiTia can easily be
deployed at roadsides. It is of low cost and resource efﬁcient. Our contribu-
tions are given as follows: 1) To deal with low signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs)
and stochastic disturbances in trafﬁc information acquisition, we proposed
and implemented a cross-correlation-based vehicle-detection algorithm.
2) To resolve the problems of data association, vehicle velocity calculation,
and vehicle identiﬁcation, we proposed a collaborative trafﬁc information
processing mechanism in the EasiTia system. Based on real road environ-
ment experimental analysis, we demonstrate that EasiTia is an applicable
and cost-effective candidate for a pervasive trafﬁc information acquisition
system.
Index Terms—Collaborative trafﬁc information processing, data associ-
ation, trafﬁc information acquisition, wireless sensor networks (WSNs).
I. I NTRODUCTION
As the foundation of an intelligent transportation system (ITS),
trafﬁc information plays an important role in an ITS system. At
present, there are many trafﬁc information acquisition systems, such
as the inductive loop monitoring system [1], [2], microwave [3], laser
[4], infrared [5], and video [6], [7] monitoring system, which have been
widely used to obtain trafﬁc information on expressways and main
roads in a metropolis. These developed systems can acquire trafﬁc
information of high quality in real time. However, nearly all the current
trafﬁc information acquisition systems are wired. The detectors are
ﬁrst laid on or embedded in the road; after that, they collect and send
data to the trafﬁc management center through wires. Consequently, the
deployment and maintenance of these systems is costly, and system
scalability is limited. These disadvantages prevent the implementation
of comprehensive trafﬁc information support for the ITS. Thus, a
pervasive trafﬁc information acquisition system that is of low cost,
convenient to deploy, and accurate in performance will be of great
signiﬁcance to ITS implementation in developing countries.
For reasons of low cost, high scalability, and deployment conve-
nience, wireless sensor network (WSN)-based solutions have been re-
Manuscript received June 25, 2010; revised August 31, 2010 and
November 2, 2010; accepted November 3, 2010. Date of publication De-
cember 30, 2010; date of current version June 6, 2011. This work was
supported in part by the National Basic Research Program of China under
Grant 2011CB302803, by the Beijing Natural Science Foundation under Grant
4092045, and by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under
Grant 61003292. The Associate Editor for this paper was M. Brackstone.
The authors are with the Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China (e-mail: wangrui@ict.ac.cn;
zhanglei82@ict.ac.cn; sunrongli@ict.ac.cn; gongjibing@ict.ac.cn; lcui@
ict.ac.cn).
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TITS.2010.2096467
search hot spots in trafﬁc acquisition systems [8], [9]. A well-designed
WSN-based solution for trafﬁc information acquisition systems should
resolve two problems.
1) A way to develop a real-time, accurate, and lightweight vehicle-
detection algorithm. V ehicle detection is the fundamental sys-
tem function, because only when vehicles are detected timely
and accurately can vehicle information be obtained and more
comprehensive trafﬁc information, such as trafﬁc volume, lane
occupancy, and vehicle velocity be determined. Most existing
[10], [11] methods process raw data with a ﬁlter and then use
a threshold to detect a vehicle. These methods perform well
when the noises and disturbances are relatively low. However,
if the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is low, these methods will lead
to serious degradation in detection quality, such as increases in
false alarm and missed detection rates, leading to poor system
performance. On the other hand, some constant false alarm rate
(CFAR) [12] related methods perform well, but they demand
much more computation resource. As a result, the ﬁrst challenge
that should be taken into consideration is to develop an effective
detection algorithm with limited resources.
2) A way to realize collaborative information processing (CIP).
When WSN is applied in the ﬁeld of trafﬁc information acqui-
sition, because of the unpredictable on-road environment and
poor single-node computation capacity, the road-monitoring task
should be accomplished in a collaborative way. Furthermore,
more comprehensive trafﬁc information cannot be determined
from single-node data. To obtain the required information, CIP
between multinodes is required. Due to the resource limitations,
the mechanism for internode information sharing, processing,
and fusion should be explored.
In this paper, we propose a pervasive trafﬁc information acquisition
system based on a WSN platform called EasiTia. Our main contribu-
tions are given as follows: First, we developed a WSN-based pervasive
trafﬁc information acquisition system, which can easily be deployed to
various road conditions for trafﬁc information acquisition. Second, to
resolve the problems of low detection rate and high false alarm rate in
the on-road environment, we proposed a vehicle-detection algorithm
based on cross correlation. Third, we developed a collaborative mech-
anism that calculates vehicle information. With this mechanism, data
from multinodes can be fused, and more vehicle information can be
obtained.
II. O
VERVIEW OF EasiTia SYSTEM
As shown in Fig. 1, EasiTia is composed of several information
collection units, and each unit includes several sensor nodes and an
information collection node. The sensor nodes are deployed alongside
the roads and are set to a power-saving status. When a vehicle is
detected, the sensor nodes will be woken up and acquire vehicle
information. The collected data will be sent to the corresponding
information collection node where the information will be fused and
processed. By information fusion, the information collection node
will produce comprehensive trafﬁc information for that unit and send
it to a base station that is one or more hops away. In the base
station, information from the different units will be merged, and useful
information can be supplied to potential clients via the network.
1524-9050/$26.00 © 2010 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:29:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 2 =====

616 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 12, NO. 2, JUNE 2011
Fig. 1. EasiTia system.
Fig. 2. Easi210 hardware design. (a) Hardware design. (b) Sensor node.
(c) Signal sampled by node.
A. Hardware Design
The sensor node is the basic cell of the EasiTia system. In our
EasiTia System, we designed a wireless sensor node named EZ210
[13]. As shown in Fig. 2, the sensor node is composed of a signal
collection module, a preprocessing module, a microcontroller unit
(MCU), a communication module, and a power control module. The
signal collection module senses a vehicle and produces an electrical
signal. The preprocessing module ampliﬁes the original electrical
signal and performs analog-to-digital conversion. It also supplies a
reset signal for the sensor. The MCU processes the signal and manages
the other modules. The communication module works as a radio
transmitter and receiver. The power control module supplies power for
other modules.
At present, the sensors used in a trafﬁc information acquisition
mainly include the following types: image (camera) sensor, inductive
loop detector, acoustic sensor, seismic sensor, magnetic sensor, etc.
The image sensor acquires an abundance of information, but it is
vulnerable to bad weather and nighttime operation. Furthermore, the
image sensor requires more system resources. The seismic sensor and
acoustic sensor are vulnerable to noise in deployment environments.
Since a vehicle is ferrous, the strength of the earth’s magnetic ﬂux
around the vehicle will be distorted. Consequently, we use the mag-
netic sensor HMC1021Z [14] in vehicle detection.
Fig. 3. EasiTia system architecture.
B. Software Design
Trafﬁc information processing algorithm design is the key to the
EasiTia system. The information processing consists of sensing, vehi-
cle detection, and vehicle information calculation. Generally, informa-
tion processing can be designed in a centralized or a distributed way.
However, in a trafﬁc information acquisition system, compared
with a distributed processing mechanism, the centralized processing
mechanism has the following three drawbacks.
1) The processing center may become the bottleneck, because all
the original data collected by the nodes are gathered in the center,
and the center will undertake too many processing tasks.
2) The large amount of data transmission occupies too much band-
width.
3) Sending back original data will consume too much energy, as
the communication module is the most energy-wasting module
in the node.
For the reasons previously given, we use a distributed processing
mechanism in the EasiTia system. Fig. 3 shows the information
processing procedure.
Magnetic data are collected by the sensor node. Then, it is processed
by the vehicle-detection algorithm to detect the presence of a vehicle.
When a vehicle is detected, the sensor node i will calculate the vehicle
characteristic vector (feature information) VF
i a n ds e n di tt ot h e
information collection node.
The information collection node listens and processes messages
inside a monitoring unit. When VF i is received, it will ﬁrst be associ-
ated to messages from other nodes, and then, a determination will be
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:29:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 3 =====

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 12, NO. 2, JUNE 2011 617
made on whether these messages are generated from the same vehicle
object. This process is called data association. After data association,
information from different nodes but caused by the same vehicle will
be brought together, and a record will be produced, which corresponds
to the vehicle information in this unit. Based on these records, more
comprehensive trafﬁc information such as vehicle identiﬁcation and
velocity can be calculated.
When the trafﬁc information is produced inside a collection unit,
it will be sent to a base station one or more hops away. In the base
station, records from different data collection units can be processed
by a high-level fusion algorithm. Query and storage services can also
be supplied by the base station.
Considering the complicated on-road environment and the limi-
tation of the node resource, effective trafﬁc information acquisition
should provide accurate timely vehicle detection and collaborative traf-
ﬁc information processing among the sensor nodes. We will describe
the corresponding algorithms in the next section.
III. A
LGORITHM DESIGN
A. Cross-Correlation-Based V ehicle-Detection Algorithm
The aim of vehicle detection is to detect a passing vehicle in a
ﬁxed region while the detection unit is subject to stochastic noises
and disturbances. In this paper, we propose a cross-correlation-based
vehicle-detection method called the CD algorithm. The aim of the
CD algorithm is to improve the SNR by cross correlation and then
to enable an improvement in detection performance.
1) Algorithm Design: Without loss of generality, sensor measure-
ment can be expressed as
z(t)= s(t)+ n(t). (1)
In (1), z(t) is a node measurement, and it is composed of two
parts: s(t) and n(t). s(t) is the input signal, and n(t) is the measure-
ment noise. Suppose that h(t) is a referential signal; then, the cross
correlation of h(t) and z(t) is
R
zh(t)=
+∞∫
−∞
h(τ)z(t − τ)dτ
=
+∞∫
−∞
h(τ)(s(t − τ)+ n(t − τ))dτ. (2)
It is obvious that, if z(t) is the input, Rzh(t) is the output. When
h(τ)= s(t0 − τ), the maximum spectral energy of s(t) will be re-
tained, so the largest SNR will appear in t0. Obviously, a larger SNR
will be helpful in detecting useful signal from background noise.
Based on the preceding analysis, the CD algorithm can be described
as follows: First, the cross correlation of z(t) and h(t) will be
calculated; then, the result Rzh(t) will be used to determine the signal
type and vehicle-detection output. As we use cross correlation to
increase SNR, we can obtain high detection performance with a simple
threshold method.
2) Choice of Referential Signal: In the CD algorithm, the key
problem is to choose a proper referential signal.
Ideally, when a vehicle passes a sensor, the sensor response will
reﬂect the strength change in the magnetic ﬂux. Therefore, we can
choose the change curve of magnetic ﬂux as the referential signal.
In the scenario shown in Fig. 4, a sensor is ﬁxed at point C; the
vehicle starts from point A, runs at velocity v, and reaches point B
Fig. 4. Sensor and vehicle at time instant t.
Fig. 5. CD algorithm response.
at time t. Thus, the strength of the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld around the
vehicle can be expressed by the following equation [15]:
H = m/ur3 + n (3)
where m is the magnetization, r is the distance between the sensor and
the vehicle, u is the media constant, and n is the measurement noise.
Then, the distance between B and C is given as follows:
lBC(t)=
√
d2 +( l − vt)2. (4)
According to (3) and (4), the magnetic strength H(t) is given as
follows:
H(t)= m/
(
u ·
(
d2 +( l − vt)2)3/2
)
+ n. (5)
Then, the referential signal can be expressed as
h(t)= m/
(
u ·
(
d2+(l− vt)2)3/2
)
,
√
d2+( l− vt)2 ⩽Rs (6)
where Rs indicates the maximum sensing range of the sensor. Appar-
ently, an extreme value of h(t) will be obtained if t = l/v. According
to (6), we have (l −
√
(R2
s − d2))/v ⩽ t ⩽ (l +
√
(R2
s − d2))/v,
so the time duration of referential signal 2τ is 2
√
(R2
s − d2)/v,w h e r e
2τ indicates the time duration for a vehicle passes the detection unit.
Consequently, the value of τ conforms to
τ =
√
(R2
s − d2)/vmean (7)
where vmean indicates the average speed of the vehicle.
3) V ehicle Feature Calculation: Once a vehicle is detected by the
CD algorithm, vehicle feature information will be calculated by the
sensor node. A typical vehicle response is shown in Fig. 5. In this
ﬁgure, T
p identiﬁes the time instant when the distance between the
vehicle and sensor is minimal (peak time instant), and Sp is the
response height (peak height) at the time instant Tp.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:29:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 4 =====

618 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 12, NO. 2, JUNE 2011
Fig. 6. Simulation scenario.
B. Collaborative Trafﬁc Information Processing
Obviously, it is difﬁcult to gain comprehensive trafﬁc information
based only on information provided by a single node. Furthermore,
we cannot acquire the comprehensive trafﬁc information simply by
accumulating information from several sensor nodes. Consequently,
internode CIP needs to be considered. In this section, we utilize CIP to
solve three important problems in trafﬁc information acquisition, i.e.,
data association, velocity calculation, and vehicle identiﬁcation.
1) Basic Assumptions and Deﬁnitions: EasiTia is composed of
information collection units. In each information collection unit, four
sensor nodes S
1, S2, S3,a n d S4 will be put on the roadside in a
rectangular manner, as shown in Fig. 6. Moreover, we assume that
the node location is given. Correspondingly, if Si detects a vehicle
presence, it will send vehicle information to an information collection
node. Without loss of generality, we assume that the two nodes on the
two sides ( S
1 and S2,o r S3 and S4 in Fig. 6) will detect a vehicle at
the same instant in time. In our on-road experiments, we found that,
in practice, the difference in the time instants of detection of these two
nodes was very small, and the algorithm performance was only slightly
inﬂuenced.
Suppose that the distance between nodes on the same side of the
road is l
c; we deﬁne the time window Tw as follows:
Tw = lc/vmin (8)
where vmin is the minimal velocity, which can be decided by prior
knowledge. Obviously, Tw indicates the longest time duration for a
vehicle passing the detection unit.
Since we choose the magnetic sensor and the maximum sensing
range of the HMC1021Z, Rs is 7 m, we assume that our system is
deployed on a bidirectional two-lane road. By adopting multi-detection
units, our solution can easily be expanded to a more general road
environment.
2) Data Association: When a bidirectional two-lane road is as-
sumed, there are three typical scenarios. Scenario 1: for each time
frame, only one vehicle appears in the detection unit. Scenario 2: two
vehicles appear in the detection unit but run in the same direction.
Scenario 3: two vehicles appear in the detection unit but run in opposite
directions.
All three scenarios are shown in Fig. 7. In scenario 1, in T
w for any
node Si, only one vehicle is detected. In scenarios 2 and 3, in Tw for
node Si, at least two vehicles will be detected. In all these scenarios,
the sensor node should correlate its vehicle measurement in Tw with
measurements from the other nodes, which means the data association
must be resolved.
In scenarios 2 and 3, it is clear that problems of data association
cannot be solved based on measurement from a single node. Therefore,
a multinode collaboration-based data association method is proposed
to associate measurements with the appropriate vehicles.
In the scenario of two lanes and two directions, data association
can be divided into the following two steps: 1) Determine the vehicle
lane of this measurement. 2) Determine which vehicle in that lane
Fig. 7. Typical trafﬁc scenarios. strong response in close side and weak
in distant side (Scenario 1: Single vehicle. Scenario 2: Two vehicles, same
direction. Scenario 3: Two vehicles, reverse directions).
causes this measurement. Based on this analysis, we use strength and
time information to accomplish data association. We determine the
vehicle lane information by the measurement strength of the nodes and
then accomplish data association through the node’s time measurement
information.
According to (3), the response strength is in the inverse ratio to r
3,
so the roadside node will produce a strong response when a vehicle
appears in the lane closer to it. On the other hand, a weak response will
be produced if a vehicle appears in the far lane. This notable property
will be used in this paper.
In our system, the distance between in-unit nodes is not very large;
correspondingly, the situation in which two vehicles enter and leave the
same detection unit can be considered to follow the “First-In First-Out
(FIFO)” rule. In other words, vehicle overtaking inside the detection
unit is not supposed to occur. Consequently, the time sequence of
vehicles passing by can be used to address the data-association issue.
Based on the preceding analysis, we propose a data association
algorithm as follows:
When vehicle A passes a detection unit at time instant t, the nodes
on both sides i and j will detect this vehicle at the same time. Their
response strength measurements
iSpA
t and jSpA
t
will be produced.
Then, a feature vector at the time instant t, i.e., CH ij
t :( iSpA
t , jSpA
t
),
can be calculated. In a time window Tw , more than one feature vector
may be generated by the node pair i and j. We identify these feature
vectors as CH ij = {CH ij
1 ,CH ij
2 ,...,CH ij
m }. Meanwhile, another
node pair k and l may produce more than one feature vector in Tw .W e
identify them as CH kl = {CH kl
1 ,CH kl
2 ,...,CH kl
n }.
According to the preceding analysis, when CH ij
t is given, based
on the strong–weak relationship in the response strength of the feature
vector, an alternative subset of CH
kl
t , which consists of all the vectors
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:29:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 5 =====

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 12, NO. 2, JUNE 2011 619
Fig. 8. Time delay in message synchronization.
caused by vehicles from the same lane, can be produced. Meanwhile,
if two vehicles run in the same lane, they are traveling in the same
direction. Combined with the FIFO rule we assumed, the correspond-
ing vector CH kl
t , which is caused by the same vehicle and results in
CH ij
t , can be determined.
3) V elocity Calculation: Theoretically, vehicle velocity v can be
calculated according to the time duration between the vehicle passing
two nodes on the same side. Suppose that, in Fig. 6, the distance
between s
1 and s3 is lc and the time interval is Tlc ; then, the vehicle
velocity can be calculated by the following equation:
v = lc/Tlc . (9)
However, to accurately calculate v, the following problems need
to be addressed: 1) how to realize accurate synchronization between
nodes and 2) the criterion for the distance l
c.
As the nodes do not share the same clock, an accurate synchro-
nization mechanism is required for each detection unit. Here, we
introduce a master–slave collaborative synchronization mechanism.
Suppose that the master node s
1 is the node that ﬁrst detects the target
and the remaining nodes are the slave nodes.
As shown in Fig. 8, at the beginning of synchronization, the master
node broadcasts its local time stamp. The slave node then receives the
time stamp TM and sets its local time to TS . We have the following
deﬁnitions as illustrated in Fig. 8: (TS − TM ) is Δ t; TPM is the time
interval in which the master node prepares to send the synchronization
packet (SynPac for short); TTM is the time interval during which the
master node transports the SynPac; TTMS is the interval during which
the SynPac is transmitted from the master node to the slave node; TRS
is the time interval during which the slave node receives the SynPac;
TPS is the time interval in which the slave node processes the SynPac;
RdT is the data transporting rate; RdR is the data receiving rate, and
NSyn is the length of the SynPac. Thus
Δ t = TPM + TTM + TTMS + TRS + TPS. (10)
Because TPM, TTMS,a n d TPS are negligible, compared with TTM
or TRS,t h e n
Δ t ≈ TTM + TRS ≈ RdT · NSyn + RdR · NSyn ≈ 2 · Rd · NSyn.
(11)
The distance between node S1 and node S3 in Fig. 7 (expressed as
lc) is predeﬁned before the installation of the monitoring system and
is constant since the nodes are static while they are working. On the
one hand, the two nodes should be closer to each other, so that no
vehicle overtaking occurs in the detection range. On the other hand,
as the clocks of the two nodes are not completely consistent, the node
distance should be large enough, so that the error caused by the node
time difference can be ignored. Thus, the choice of l
c is a tradeoff be-
tween the nonovertaking and synchronization differences weakening.
Suppose that our acceptable largest measurement error is ERv ;t h e n
(vveh − v′
veh)/vveh ⩽ ERv (12)
where v′
veh is the measurement of vehicle velocity vveh. Δ t is the error
of time synchronization; then, we have
v′
veh = lc/((lc/vveh)+Δ t) . (13)
According to (12) and (13), if the velocity is maximized (vveh =
vmax), vveh · Δ t · (1 − ERv)/ERv will be maximized, so lc should
conform to
lc ⩾ vmax · Δ t · (1 − ERv)/ERv. (14)
4) Target Identiﬁcation: In China, it is common for bicycles (non-
motor objects) and vehicles (motor objects) to share the same road.
Therefore, the ability to identify bicycles is desirable in building
an accurate trafﬁc information acquisition system. In general, the
ferromagnetic characteristics of a vehicle are much more pronounced
than that of a bicycle, and the theoretical strength of response from a
vehicle is usually greater than that from a bicycle. This information
about the strength of the magnetic response can be used in vehicle
identiﬁcation. However, the strength of magnetic response is also
related to the distance between the observation node and the object.
The strength of the response will decay with the increment in distance.
Therefore, the strength of the response caused by a distant vehicle may
approximate that of a closer bicycle. V elocity is another useful source
of information in vehicle identiﬁcation. The velocity of a vehicle is
usually greater than the velocity of bicycle, and only in special cases
such as a car slowing down to a stop or trafﬁc jam may it be slower
than a typical bicycle.
According to the aforementioned analysis, it can be seen that, if only
one type of physical information is used, the identiﬁcation accuracy
might not be satisfying. However, if multiple types of information
are fused, particularly when the types of information are comple-
mentary, the identiﬁcation accuracy may be improved. In this paper,
the Dempster–Shafer Theory of Evidence [16] (DST) is adopted to
identify the vehicle, and we take these two types of information as
evidences.
The foremost issue in DST reasoning is the construction of a
basic belief mass model . Based on the statistical analysis of the large
quantities of actual on-road measured data, we construct a simple but
approximate basic belief mass model .
Based on the statistical analysis, the lower limit of the response
strength of a vehicle (VS
low) and the upper limit of the response
strength of a bicycle (BShigh) can be obtained. VS low may be caused
by a mini car in the far lane, and BShigh may be caused by a bicycle
in the near lane. BShigh is usually higher than VS low.W h e n Sp
(response strength) is lower than VS low, the detected object is more
likely to be a bicycle. Thus, we assign bicycle a high mass value of 0.9
and vehicle a low mass value of 0.1. When Sp is greater than BS
high,
the detected object is more likely to be the vehicle. Thus, in this case,
we assign bicycle a low mass value of 0.1 and vehicle a high mass
value of 0.9. However, when Sp is between VS
low and BShigh,i t
might be either a vehicle or a bicycle. Therefore, we simply assign both
of them to be 0.5. The mass model for response strength is shown in
mSp(bicycle)=
⎧
⎨
⎩
0.9,S p < V S low
0.1,S p > B S high
0.5, Others
mSp(vehicle)=
⎧
⎨
⎩
0.1,S p < V S low
0.9,S p > B S high
0.5, Others.
(15)
As for velocity, similar rules are built based on the lower limit of the
velocity of the vehicle VV low and the upper limit of the velocity of the
bicycle BVhigh. The difference is that, when the velocity of detected
object is between VV low and BVhigh, we assume that the probability
of it being a bicycle linearly decreases with the increase in velocity
while the probability of it being a vehicle linearly increases.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:29:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 6 =====

620 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 12, NO. 2, JUNE 2011
TABLE I
SIMULA TION PARAMETERS
The mass model for velocity is shown in
mv(bicycle)=
⎧
⎨
⎩
0.9,v < V V low
0.1,v > B V high
0.9 − 0.8·(v− VV low)
BVhigh− VV low
, Others
mv(vehicle)=
⎧
⎨
⎩
0.1,v < V V low
0.9,v > B V high
0.1+ 0.8·(v− VV low)
BVhigh− VV low
, Others.
(16)
According to the DST combination rules, we can get combination
evidence through the fusion of the response strength evidence and the
velocity evidence. After fusion, the masses for the bicycle and the
vehicle can be calculated, respectively. If the mass of the bicycle is
larger than that of the vehicle, we would identify the detected object as
the bicycle; otherwise, it is the vehicle.
IV . S
YSTEM EVA L U AT I O N
A. Simulation Settings
Our on-road experiments were carried out on a bidirectional two-
lane road, as shown in Fig. 6. Four Easi210 nodes equipped with
HMC1021Z were put on the roadside. The detection unit reported its
measurements when a vehicle passed through the detection unit.
As we have mentioned before, our proposed system is low in cost for
pervasive deployment. In this experiment, one detection unit, including
four sensor nodes and an information collection node, costs less
than $250.
Guided by statistics on actual on-road measured data, we adopt the
following values for the parameters. These parameters will be used in
the personal computer simulation and on-road experiments.
According to Table I, some detailed parameters can be calculated.
Based on (14), the distance between nodes on the same side of the
road should conform to l
c ⩾ 4.76 m; so here, we choose lc =6 m.
Based on (8), the window duration Tw is 1.2 s. According to (7),
the time duration of the referential signal can be calculated, i.e., τ =√
(R2
s − d2)/vmean ≈ 0.7 s .S i n c ew es e tt h es a m p l i n gr a t efs to be
100 Hz, the length of the referential signal is 2 × τ × fs = 140. Then,
according to (6), we can calculate the normalized referential signal
h(t)= − 42.875 × (12.25 +x(t)
2)− 3/2, |x(t)| ⩽ 7,w h e r e x(t)=
l − vt is lDC in Fig. 4.
B. On-Road Experiments
The on-road experiment is shown in Fig. 9. To verify the basis of our
experiment, we used a video camera to capture visual images, so that
Fig. 9. On-road experiments.
TABLE II
VEHICLE DETECTION RESULT OF ON-ROAD EXPERIMENT
the detection accuracy could be established by the video. The video
captures image at 24 frame/s, and, by counting the frames as a vehicle
passes through the detection unit, the real vehicle velocity can be
obtained. In this section, we will show the results of the on-road tests
on vehicle detection, velocity calculation, and vehicle identiﬁcation.
1) Detection Experiments: Here, we verify the CD algorithm via
on-road experiments. The CD algorithm was implemented on Easi210
nodes, and an on-road detection experiment was conducted.
The detection result is shown in Table II. In total, ten groups of
detection test were completed. The worst result was over 80%, whereas
the best was 100%. The overall detection quality was about 90%.
To compare the performances of the different detection methods,
we processed on-road sensor data with several commonly used meth-
ods, including the direct threshold measurement method [10] [using
thresholds on the raw data (DT)] and the ﬁnite impulse response (FIR)-
based threshold measurement method [11] [using the thresholds on
the data processed by FIR (FIRT)]. The actual number of vehicles is
ascertained by watching the synchronized video. In the CD simulation,
the data are processed by the CD algorithm with two thresholds, i.e.,
0.3(low) and 0.4(high). In the DT simulation, the data are processed
by the threshold algorithm. The value of the threshold is 10UG(low)
and 20UG(high), using the unit (HMC1021 resolution), below the
background noise strength. In the FIRT simulation, the data are ﬁrst
processed by a low-pass ﬁlter (the cutoff frequency of the ﬁlter is
4 Hz); then, two thresholds, i.e., 10UG(low) and 20UG(high), are used
to detect the appearance of the vehicle. According to the results shown
in Table III, when the low threshold is adopted, the detection rate of
the DT and FIRT is relatively high, but the false alarm rate is also
relatively high. When the high threshold is adopted, although the false
alarm rate of the DT and FIRT can be reduced, their detection rate
also decreases. Referring to our proposed CD algorithm, we see from
this table that the CD algorithm is not sensitive to the threshold, and
its false alarm rate is very low (0 when the threshold is 0.3 and 0.4).
Therefore, we can conclude that the CD algorithm outperforms the
commonly used detection methods. Furthermore, the results indicate
that the CD algorithm is not threshold sensitive.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:29:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 7 =====

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 12, NO. 2, JUNE 2011 621
TABLE III
ORIGINAL MAGNETIC DATA F O R SIMULA TION
TABLE IV
VELOCITY CALCULA TION RESULT OF ON-ROAD EXPERIMENT
TABLE V
VEHICLE IDENTIFICA TION RESULTS OF DIFFERENT APPROACHES
2) On-Road Experiments of V elocity Calculation: We conducted
four groups of tests, and each test lasted 10 min.
In all four tests, nine vehicles appeared in group 1, 11 vehicles in
group 2, ﬁve fast bicycles in group 3, and ﬁve slow bicycles in group 4.
The results of the average velocity for each group are listed in Table IV.
In groups 1 and 2, it can be seen that, when the velocity was relatively
high, the estimation error was large. The reason is that, in this case,
the error of time duration calculation was relatively large. The average
accuracy of the velocity measurement was estimated to be 90%.
3) V ehicle Identiﬁcation: Based on the constructed masses of the
response strength and the velocity above, we implemented DST-
based vehicle identiﬁcation ( D
vi method). To compare the difference
between identiﬁcation results before and after fusion, we also imple-
mented vehicle identiﬁcation only according to the response strength
(Rvi method) and only according to the velocity ( Vvi method). In Rvi,
the average of the mean vehicle response strength and the mean bicycle
response strength was taken as the threshold. We also applied similar
operations to Vvi.
In our on-road simulation, the sample size of the detected objects
was 72, of which 31 were bicycles and the rest objects were vehicles.
The identiﬁcation results are shown in Table V.
According to Table V, if the vehicle identiﬁcation is accomplished
only based on response strength, the accuracy will be low, i.e., about
51.39% in our experiment. The reason is that the magnetic response
strength of a vehicle is decided by not only the magnetic feature of
the vehicle itself but also the distance between the vehicle and sensors.
The uncertainty of response strength leads to the low identiﬁcation
accuracy.
Compared with strength-only vehicle identiﬁcation, the identiﬁca-
tion accuracy based only on speed is about 83.33%. The reason is
that velocity information is more reliable in identiﬁcation, and vehicle
is commonly much faster than bicycle. A better identiﬁcation, with
identiﬁcation accuracy up to 88.89%, is achieved by the DST method.
In particular, the vehicle-identiﬁcation accuracy is greatly improved.
The reason is that two kinds of complementary information are taken
into consideration.
V. C
ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we have designed and implemented a pervasive trafﬁc
information acquisition system based on WSNs. Unlike traditional
video cameras or inductive loops, our solution is of low cost and
resource efﬁcient. It can easily be deployed at the roadside. Further-
more, the system implementation does not require the excavation of
the road surface and extra devices in the road infrastructure. Compared
with radio-frequency identiﬁcation or in-vehicle trafﬁc information
acquisition systems, no device on a vehicle is required by our system.
Thus, our proposed system is more adaptable and scalable.
In the future, we will collect enough trafﬁc data, so that we can
develop intelligent algorithm to improve the system performance.
Meanwhile, we plan to utilize the collected data to enable our proposed
approach to deal with more comprehensive trafﬁc scenarios. Further-
more, we plan to use more types of sensors, e.g., acoustic or image
sensor, to gain new physical information. By fusion of multimodal sen-
sor information, we will investigate more comprehensive and accurate
trafﬁc information systems.
R
EFERENCES
[1] Q. Kong, Z. Li, Y . Chen, and Y . Liu, “An approach to urban trafﬁc
state estimation by fusing multisource information,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
Transp. Syst., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 499–511, Sep. 2009.
[2] C. Sun, G. Arr, R. Ramachandran, and S. Ritchie, “V ehicle reidentiﬁcation
using multidetector fusion,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 5, no. 3,
pp. 155–164, Sep. 2004.
[3] J. Wang, E. Case, and D. Manor, “The road trafﬁc microwave sensor
(RTMS),” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. V eh. Navig. Inf. Syst., 1992, pp. 83–90.
[4] H. Cheng, B. Shaw, J. Palen, B. Lin, B. Chen, and Z. Wang, “Development
and ﬁeld test of a laser-based nonintrusive detection system for identiﬁca-
tion of vehicles on the highway,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,v o l .6 ,
no. 2, pp. 147–155, Jun. 2005.
[5] T. Hussain, A. Baig, T. Saadawi, and S. Ahmed, “Infrared pyroelectric
sensor for detection of vehicular trafﬁc using digital signal processing
techniques,” IEEE Trans. V eh. Technol. , vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 683–689,
Aug. 1995.
[6] Y . Chen, “Highway overhead structure detection using video image se-
quences,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. , vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 67–77,
Jun. 2003.
[7] G. Alessandretti, A. Broggi, and P . Cerri, “V ehicle and guard rail detection
using radar and vision data fusion,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. ,
vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 95–105, Mar. 2007.
[8] A. Haoui, R. Kavaler, and P . V araiya, “Wireless magnetic sensors for
trafﬁc surveillance,” Transp. Res. Part C: Emerging Technol. , vol. 16,
no. 3, pp. 294–306, Jun. 2008.
[9] K. Kwong, R. Kavaler, R. Rajagopal, and P . V araiya, “Real-time measure-
ment of link vehicle count and travel time in a road network,” IEEE Trans.
Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 814–825, Dec. 2010.
[10] L. Gu, D. Jia, P . Vicaire, T. Y an, L. Luo, A. Tirumala, Q. Cao, T. He,
J. Stankovic, T. Abdelzaher, and B. Krogh, “Lightweight detection and
classiﬁcation for wireless sensor networks in realistic environments,” in
Proc. 3rd ACM Conf. Embedded Netw. Sens. Syst. , 2005, pp. 205–217.
[11] J. Ding, S. Cheung, C. Tan, and P . V araiya, “Signal processing of sensor
node data for vehicle detection,” in Proc. 7th Int. IEEE Conf. Intell.
Transp. Syst., 2004, pp. 70–75.
[12] M. di Bisceglie and C. Galdi, “CFAR detection of extended objects in
high-resolution SAR images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 43,
no. 4, pp. 833–843, Apr. 2005.
[13] Easinet, Website, 03 2010. [Online]. Available: http://www.easinet.cn/
en/products.htm
[14] HMC1001, HMC1002, HMC1021 and HMC1022 1 and 2-Axis Magnetic
Sensors, Website, 03 2010. [Online]. Available: http://www.ssec.
honeywell.com/magnetic/datasheets/hmc1001-2_1021-2.pdf
[15] R. S. Trebble and D. Craik, Magnetic Materials . New Y ork: Wiley-
Interscience, 2008.
[16] G. Shafer, A Mathematical Theory of Evidence. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
Univ. Press, 1976.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:29:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 