

===== PAGE 1 =====

Geomagnetic Sensor based Abnormal Parking
Detection in Smart Roads
Runsen He1,2, Guoqiang Mao 1,2, Yilong Hui 1,2,∗, and Qingwei Cheng 1,2
1.State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks, Xidian University, Xi’an, 710071
2.Research Institute of Smart Transportation, Xidian University, Xi’an, 710071
*ylhui@xidian.edu.cn
Abstract—With the development of Internet of Things (IoT)
and communication technology, abnormal parking detection
based on geomagnetic sensors equipped with solar panels has
become increasingly feasible and important. False parking
detection is a main challenge affecting the widespread use
of the aforementioned technology. Especially when ambient
light change triggers changes in the current of solar panel,
which may in turn cause local EM ﬁeld changes and affect the
detection of nearby geomagnetic sensor . To that end, we propose
an abnormal parking detection scheme to distinguish between
real parking and false detections. Speciﬁcally, we establish
an equivalent model of the magnetic ﬁeld around the solar
panel, and design a method to compute the magnetic ﬁeld
at the periphery of the solar panel. Then, we analyze the
difference between the magnetic ﬁeld caused by the changes in
ambient light and the magnetic ﬁeld produced by vehicles, and
extract features that distinguish abnormal parking from false
detections. Based on the features, a state machine is designed
to distinguish the false detection of light from the real parking
based on the magnetic ﬁeld waveform. Field tests show that the
accuracy of the designed abnormal parking detection scheme
can reach 97%.
Index Terms—Internet of things, abnormal parking detection,
geomagnetic sensor, smart roads
I. I NTRODUCTION
With the rapid development of Internet of Things (IoT)
and communication technology, smart road technology has
received extensive attention from industry and academia [1].
In smart roads, by analyzing and processing trafﬁc data
sensed by roadside sensors, efﬁcient trafﬁc management and
abnormal event processing can be achieved to improve the
trafﬁc efﬁciency.
As a common road abnormal event, abnormal parking
refers to an event in which vehicles stay on the main lane or
emergency lane. Due to the high driving speed of vehicles,
abnormal parking events will affect the normal trafﬁc order
and may lead to trafﬁc accidents. Therefore, accurate identi-
ﬁcation of abnormal vehicle parking events is an important
function for smart roads. The existing schemes for detecting
abnormal parking based on various radars or videos are
difﬁcult to deploy on a large scale on highways due to
cost limitations or visibility limitations. Recently, due to the
advantages of geomagnetic sensors such as low cost and
robust to environmental changes, researchers worldwide have
investigated parking detection schemes based on geomagnetic
sensors. In [2], the authors proposed an intelligent vehicle
management scheme using geomagnetic sensors to realize
real-time sharing of parking space information. In [3], the au-
thors proposed a parking detection algorithm for eliminating
interference from adjacent parking. The test showed that the
detection accuracy of the algorithm for vehicles entering and
leaving the parking space is 99.8% and 99.9%, respectively.
In order to overcome the interference of vehicles in adjacent
parking spaces, Zhang et al. [4] fused the data features
collected by the geomagnetic sensors from multiple adjacent
parking spaces to detect the current parking space occupancy.
In [5], the authors proposed a parking detection algorithm
that considers the temperature drift. With this algorithm, the
inﬂuence of temperature on parking detection accuracy can
be reduced.
Although parking detection based on geomagnetic sensors
has been widely studied, the detection solutions in the
literature mostly focused on detection in parking lots, with
few studying abnormal parking detection in highways. In the
parking lot scenario, the number of sensors is relatively small
and the location is relatively concentrated. Therefore, the
sensors can be powered by the battery or directly connected
to a power source. However, in the highway scenario, the
replacement of batteries or wired power supply will bring
huge consumption of human and ﬁnancial resources.
For this reason, IoT devices integrating solar panels and
geomagnetic sensors have gradually gained widespread at-
tention [6]. Through the integration of geomagnetic sensors,
microprocessors, solar panels, batteries and other compo-
nents, the sensors can overcome the problems of high man-
ufacturing costs and poor battery life, and realize real-time
abnormal parking detection in highway scenarios. However,
the integration of solar panels and geomagnetic sensors
in closely packed IoT devices also brings new challenges.
Speciﬁcally, when the solar panel charges the sensor battery
under sunlight, a photon-generated current will be generated,
which induces magnetic ﬁeld around the solar panel. There-
fore, when the ambient light changes drastically, the magnetic
ﬁeld strength around the solar panel will ﬂuctuate, which may
cause false detection and affect the accuracy of trafﬁc ﬂow
monitoring [7].
To address the aforementioned false detection problem,
we propose an abnormal parking detection scheme that
can distinguish between real parking and false detection.
Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst establish a magnetic ﬁeld model around
2023 IEEE Global Communications Conference: IoT and Sensor Networks
1060
GLOBECOM 2023 - 2023 IEEE Global Communications Conference | 979-8-3503-1090-0/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/GLOBECOM54140.2023.10437955
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on December 11,2024 at 05:22:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 2 =====

Y
X
Z
Magnetic 
Sensors
Uniform UniformHighly-
Distorted
Highly-
Distorted
Slightly-
Distorted
Y
X
Z
Y
X
Z
Fig. 1. The deployment of sensor node
the solar panel to calculate the magnetic ﬁeld at the periphery
of the solar panel. Then, we analyze the difference between
the magnetic ﬁeld generated by light and the magnetic ﬁeld
generated by a vehicle passing through the geomagnetic
sensor, and extract the features that can be used to distinguish
abnormal parking and false detection. After that, we design a
state machine to distinguish between false detections caused
by the changes in ambient light and real parking. Finally, we
verify the effectiveness of our proposed scheme through ﬁeld
tests.
The remainder of this paper is summarized as follows. Sec-
tion II presents the system model of the geomagnetic sensor
node and the equivalent model of the magnetic ﬁeld around
the solar panel. In Section III, the abnormal parking detection
scheme is described. Section IV presents the experimental
results, followed by the conclusion in Section V .
II. S YSTEM MODEL
A. Geomagnetic Sensor
The geomagnetic sensor node used in this paper is com-
posed of microprocessor, geomagnetic sensor, data transmis-
sion module, solar panel, battery and its charging circuit [8].
The microprocessor adopts STM32F103 series 64-bit mi-
crocontroller. The solar panel converts solar energy into
electrical energy, charges the battery, which in turn supplies
power to the sensor node. The geomagnetic sensor is a
three-axis geomagnetic sensor with a sampling frequency
of 100Hz. It can simultaneously collect three-axis (i.e, X,
Y , Z) magnetic ﬁeld strength data. After collecting the
data, the data transmission module then uses the LoRa
wireless communication module to upload the data to an edge
computing server. As shown in Fig. 1, the sensor nodes are
deployed along the road boundary line, where the positive
direction of the X-axis of the sensor is the same as the
driving direction of the vehicle; the positive direction of the
Y -axis is parallel to the road and points to the centre of the
lane; the positive direction of the Z-axis is perpendicular to
the road.
Let Fx(k), Fy(k), and Fz(k) denote the magnetic ﬁeld
data of the X, Y , and Z axes at the k-th sampling instant. In
order to process the environmental noise, the collected data
will be processed by a moving average ﬁlter. The ﬁltering
formula can be expressed as
Fi(k)= 1
W −2
(
W∑
j=1
Fi(k −W +j)−Fmin −Fmax
)
(1)
where i ∈{ X,Y,Z }, Fi(k) is the ﬁltered data, W is
the length of the sliding window, Fmin and Fmax are the
minimum and maximum values of the magnetic ﬁeld data in
the sliding window, respectively [8].
As shown in Fig. 1, when the vehicle enters the detection
range of the geomagnetic sensor, the vehicle will induce
a magnetic ﬁeld which can be sensed by the geomagnetic
sensor. When the vehicle leaves the detection range of the
geomagnetic sensor, the surrounding magnetic ﬁeld will
return to the original level. Therefore, we take the magnetic
ﬁeld strength value when no vehicle passes as the baseline.
If the detected magnetic ﬁeld strength deviates signiﬁcantly
from the baseline, it indicates that the vehicle is entering.
Conversely, if the magnetic ﬁeld strength returns to the
vicinity of the baseline, it indicates that the vehicle is leaving.
Since the geomagnetic ﬁeld will ﬂuctuate slowly due to the
interference of environmental factors such as temperature,
the sensor nodes will update the baseline when no vehicles
pass by. We have
Fi
b = 1
J
J∑
j=1
Fi(k −J +j) (2)
where Fi
b is the updated baseline on axis i, which is equal to
the average of the latest J raw data collected for this axis.
In order to make full use of the information of the three-
axis data, the microprocessor fuses the ﬁltered three-axis data
and uses the fused data for vehicle detection [8]. The three-
axis data can be fused by
Ffusion(k)
=
√
(FX(k)−FX
b )
2
+(FY (k)−FY
b )
2
+(FZ(k)−FZ
b )
2
(3)
where Ffusion(k) is the fused magnetic ﬁeld strength at
sampling time k.
Based on (3), we set the detection threshold θth.I fa
consecutive of M sampled data satisfying Ffusion(k) ≥θth,
it is determined that a vehicle is passing the sensor node.
In contrast, if a consecutive of N sampled data satisfying
Ffusion(k) <θth, it is determined that the vehicle has left.
B. Magnetic Field Model for Solar Panels
It has been pointed out in [9] that a direct current (DC)
photon-generated current will be generated if sunlight hits a
solar panel, which will induce a magnetic ﬁeld in the space.
Due to the large number of current branches on the surface of
solar panels, analyzing the magnetic ﬁeld intensity generated
by each branch at a certain point in space is extremely
cumbersome. Therefore, in order to simplify the calculation,
we approximate and simplify multiple currents. Due to the
symmetry of the solar panel circuit, we consider equating the
photon-generated current inside it to a total current located
2023 IEEE Global Communications Conference: IoT and Sensor Networks
1061
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on December 11,2024 at 05:22:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 3 =====

L
r
A
¦2
¦
2
¦1
Y
X
Z
Solar Panel
Equivalent 
Current
r
Magnetic Field 
Direction
Fig. 2. The positional relationship between the solar panel and the
geomagnetic sensor
at the centerline of the solar panel. Furthermore, we consider
the geomagnetic sensor located at a point outside and near
the solar panel. Then the positional relationship between the
solar panel and the geomagnetic sensor can be simpliﬁed as
the positional relationship between a ﬁnite-length DC current
and a point outside the current, as shown in Fig. 2.
In Fig. 2, the photon-generated current inside the solar
panel is approximately modeled by a DC current with a
length L and a magnitude of I, where L is approximately
equal to the length of the solar panel. Point A is the location
of the geomagnetic sensor. r is the length of the vertical
line from point A to the DC current I. By connecting point
A to the two end points of the current, we can obtain the
angles between the two lines and the vertical line, namely,
α1 and α2. Let the vertical line be the reference and take the
counterclockwise direction as the positive direction, then we
have α1 > 0 and α2 < 0.
According to the electromagnetic ﬁeld theory, the magnetic
ﬁeld strength generated by the equivalent current at point A
in Fig. 2 is given by
B = μ0I
4π
∫
L
dL× r
r3 = e· μ0I
4πr(sinα1 −sinα2) (4)
where μ0 is the magnetic permeability in the vacuum, e is
a unit vector with the same direction as the direction of the
magnetic ﬁeld B.
According to the theory of photovoltaic power generation,
the photon-generated current in the solar panel is proportional
to the ambient light intensity. Therefore, it can be assumed
that the relationship between the photon-generated current I
and the light intensity G is
I = p1G+p2 (5)
where p1 and p2 are the unknown constants to be determined.
By substituting Eq. (5) into Eq. (4), the relationship
between the magnetic ﬁeld intensity B and the light intensity
G can be given by
B = e· μ0(p1G+p2)
4πr (sinα1 −sinα2) (6)
III. P ARKING DETECTION SCHEME
A. Detection of V ehicle Parking and Departure
It has been pointed out in Section II-A that the vehicle
detection uses Eq. (3) to fuse the data collected by the
geomagnetic sensor to determine the arrival and departure of
vehicles. Therefore, the abnormal parking detection also uses
the characteristics of the three-axis waveform to determine
the parking event. When a vehicle is parked within the
detection range of the sensor node for a sufﬁciently long time,
the magnetic ﬁeld waveform collected by the geomagnetic
sensor will tend to be stable. In addition, the relative position
of the vehicle to the sensor node will result in different
waveform shapes and amplitudes after stabilization.
Speciﬁcally, the range of magnetic ﬁeld data is used in our
scheme for judging whether the waveform becomes stable.
Let FS
fusion represents the set of S magnetic ﬁeld data
collected by the geomagnetic sensor, then the range of these
data can be calculated by
Range =m a x{FS
fusion}−min{FS
fusion} (7)
Based on Eq. (7), we denote the threshold as θrange .I f
Range < θrange , it is determined that the waveform has
stabilized. That is, a vehicle is parked within the detection
range of the sensor node. The value of θrange will be
determined in Section III-D.
When the abnormally parked vehicle leaves, the magnetic
ﬁeld will return to a level similar to that before the vehicle
parked. Therefore, similar to the detection of normal vehicles,
the magnetic ﬁeld strength of N consecutive sampled data
is less than the detection threshold θth, it is determined that
the vehicle has left, and the abnormal parking event ends.
B. Features to Distinguish False Detection from Real Park-
ing
To distinguish between false detection caused by the
changes in ambient light and real parking, we ﬁrst need
to analyze the difference between the two magnetic ﬁeld
waveforms. According to the research in [10], different parts
of a vehicle have different degrees of inﬂuence on the geo-
magnetic ﬁeld. Speciﬁcally, the parts that have the greatest
inﬂuence on the geomagnetic ﬁeld are mainly the axles and
the engine. Therefore, we can divide abnormal parking into
two cases according to different relative positions of the
vehicle and the sensor node.
Case that has Not Passed(CNP): The vehicle stops as
soon as it enters the detection range of the geomagnetic
sensor, as shown in Fig. 3(a);
Case that has Passed(CP): Part or all of the vehicle has
passed the geomagnetic sensor before stopping, as shown in
Fig. 3(b).
For CNP, because the main body of the vehicle or the
part that has a strong inﬂuence on the magnetic ﬁeld is
2023 IEEE Global Communications Conference: IoT and Sensor Networks
1062
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on December 11,2024 at 05:22:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 4 =====

Sensor Node
(a) CNP
Sensor Node
(b) CP
Fig. 3. Two cases of abnorma1 parking
00 . 511 . 522 . 533 . 544 . 55
Time(s)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000Magnetic Field Intensity (nT)
CNP
CP
false detection
Fig. 4. The magnetic ﬁeld wave-
forms of parking and false detection
00 . 511 . 522 . 533 . 544 . 55
Time(s)
-200
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400Magnetic Field Intensity (nT)
CNP.X
false detection.X
Fig. 5. The X-axis waveforms of
CNP and of false detection in Fig. 4
gradually approaching the geomagnetic sensor, the magnetic
ﬁeld waveform shows an upward trend with time, and the
amplitude of the overall waveform is however small, as
shown in Waveform of CNP in Fig. 4. For CP, part or all of
the vehicle that has a strong inﬂuence on the magnetic ﬁeld
begins to move away from the geomagnetic sensor. Thus, the
magnetic ﬁeld waveform has reached the peak value, and the
amplitude begins to decrease, as shown in Waveform of CP
in Fig. 4.
As can be seen from Fig. 4, the waveform of CP has a
signiﬁcant amplitude difference from the waveform of false
detection. Therefore, we consider the “maximum value of
the waveform” as a feature to distinguish false detection,
which is represented by PM . Speciﬁcally, when it is detected
that the change of the current magnetic ﬁeld may be caused
by abnormal parking, by extracting the peak value of the
waveform and comparing it with an appropriately chosen
threshold θM , the false detection can be distinguished from
the real parking in CP.
Different from CP, as shown in Waveform of CNP and
Waveform of false detection in Fig. 4, the magnetic ﬁeld
waveform collected by the sensor node in CNP is similar to
that caused by the false detection in amplitude and waveform.
In this case, it is difﬁcult to distinguish the false detection
from the real parking using only PM . To this end, we need
to further consider other features. According to the model of
the solar panel magnetic ﬁeld in Section II-B, the direction
of the magnetic ﬁeld is perpendicular to the plane where
the solar panel is located, that is, perpendicular to the X-
axis of the geomagnetic sensor. Therefore, when the variation
of illumination changes the magnetic ﬁeld around the solar
panel, the magnetic ﬁeld mainly affects the Y -axis and Z-
axis data of the geomagnetic sensor, and has less effect on
the X-axis data. For the real parking event, when the sensor
node detects the vehicle, the amplitudes of the magnetic ﬁeld
waveforms of the three axes have obvious changes. That is
to say, the false detection mainly affects the data of the Y -
Baseline 
Update
Arrival 
Detection
Arrived
 Departure 
Detection
Parking 
Detection
Park
()fusion thFk Tt
1counter 
1counter Mt
()fusion thFk Tt
()fusion thFk T
()fusion thFk T
2counter 
2counter Nt
rangeRange T
MM
x
Po r
x
T
T
t
't
MM
x
P and
x
T
T

'
()fusion thFk T
()fusion thFk Tt
Fig. 6. State machine for abnormal parking detection
axis and Z-axis of the geomagnetic sensor, and the abnormal
parking has a relatively obvious impact on all three axes.
Therefore, we can distinguish between abnormal parking and
false detection by comparing the “change in amplitude of X-
axis waveform”, which is represented by Δx. Speciﬁcally,
when the geomagnetic sensor detects a waveform suspected
of abnormal parking, if the change of the waveform of the
X-axis is less than a ﬁxed threshold θx, it is considered
that the waveform is generated by false detection. On the
contrary, if the change of the waveform of the X-axis is
greater than that, it is considered that the waveform is caused
by real parking. Fig. 5 shows the X-axis waveforms of CNP
and of false detection in Fig. 4, and it can be seen that
there is a signiﬁcant difference in amplitude between the two
waveforms.
C. State Machine for Abnormal Parking Detection
According to the features discussed in Section III-B, the
state machine for abnormal parking detection is shown in
Fig. 6.
1) Baseline Update: When no vehicle passes by, the
state machine is to update the baseline using Eq. (2); If
Ffusion(k) ≥θth, then jump to Arrival Detection state.
2) Arrival Detection: In this state, a counter variable
counter1 will be established to record the number of data
satisfying Ffusion(k) ≥θth.I fcounter 1 ≥M, it suggests
that a vehicle is coming, then the state jumps to Arrived
state; Once Ffusion(k) <θth is satisﬁed, then jump to
BaselineUpdate state.
3) Arrived: In this state, Eq. (7) will be used to peri-
odically calculate Range.I fRange < θrange , then jump
to Parking Detection state. If Ffusion <θth, jump to
Departure Detection state;
4) Departure Detection: In this state, a counter counter2
will be established to record the number of data satisfying
Ffusion <θth.I f counter2 ≥N, it indicates that the vehicle
has left, then the state jumps to Baseline Update state;
Once Ffusion(k) ≥θth is satisﬁed, then jump to Arrived
state.
5) Parking Detection: In this state, the parameters PM
and Δx will be calculated to distinguish between false
detection and parking events. If PM ≥ θM or Δx ≥ θx,
then the state jumps to Park state; If PM <θM and
2023 IEEE Global Communications Conference: IoT and Sensor Networks
1063
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on December 11,2024 at 05:22:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 5 =====

Δx<θx, it means that it is a false detection, then jump
to BaselineUpdate state.
6) Park: In this state, the detection of vehicle departure
is performed, where the detection method is the same as that
of the Arrived state.
D. Determination of Parameters
For threshold θRange, we assume that the ambient noise
superimposed on the fused waveform follows a normal
distribution with an expectation of 0 and a standard deviation
ofσRange. Then an estimate of the standard deviation ˆσRange
can be obtained from the acquired waveform data. Based on
ˆσRange, we can take
θRange =( 4∼6)ˆσRange (8)
When the range of the data is less than θRange, the current
waveform can be considered to be stable.
For threshold θM , it is considered that its value should
be equal to the maximum magnetic ﬁeld change that can be
generated by the false detection. Let Gmax and Gmin denote
the maximum and minimum values of outdoor light intensity,
respectively. Then, the value of θM can be calculated by
θM = K ·ΔG+p2 (9)
where K = μ0p1
4πr(sinα1 −sinα2) and ΔG= Gmax −Gmin.
For threshold θx, attributable to noise and modeling errors
in the actual scene, the magnetic ﬁeld strength on the X-axis
caused by false detection cannot be completely 0. Therefore,
based on the measured data, we count the variation of the
X-axis magnetic ﬁeld strength in the false detection data
and use the maximum variation Δˆxmax as an estimate of
the maximum magnetic ﬁeld variation generated by the false
detection on the X-axis. Then, we assume that the noise
superimposed on the X-axis follows a normal distribution
with an expectation of 0 and a standard deviation of σx.B y
collecting X-axis environmental data when no vehicles pass
by, we can obtain the estimate of σx. Based on the estimate
ˆσx,w eh a v e
θx =Δ ˆxmax +(4 ∼6) ˆσx (10)
ForθRange, its value is related to ˆσRange. In most road sce-
narios, there is no strong magnetic ﬁeld interference source
near the sensor node, and the noise mainly comes from the
slight ﬂuctuations of the geomagnetic ﬁeld. Therefore, the
value of ˆσRange is consistent across all scenarios. For θM
and θx, K, p2 and Δˆxmax involved in Eq. (9) and Eq.
(10), they depend on the hardware properties of the sensor
nodes. ΔG is the maximum value of outdoor light variation,
which has fully considered the extreme situations in various
road scenarios. θx is similar to θRange, and its value mainly
depends on slight ﬂuctuations in the geomagnetic ﬁeld.
Therefore, the values of θM and θx are not sensitive to
different scenarios.
0123456789
Illumination(LUX) 104
-50
0
50
100
150
200Output Current(mA)
(a) First-order
0123456789
Illumination(LUX) 104
-50
0
50
100
150
200Output Current(mA)
(b) Second-order
0123456789
Illumination(LUX) 104
-50
0
50
100
150
200Output Current(mA)
(c) Third-order
Fig. 7. Polynomial ﬁtting
12345678
Data Serial Number
0
50
100
150Magnetic Field Variation
Measured Value
Theoretical Value
Fig. 8. Comparison of measured variation and theoretical variation
IV . PERFORMANCE EV ALUATION
A. Magnetic Field Model V alidation
We ﬁrst verify the relationship between the photon-
generated current in the solar panel and the ambient light
intensity. We collected 60 sets of data, each of which includes
ambient illuminance and the corresponding current output of
the solar panel. Figs. 7(a)-7(c) show these collected data and
the corresponding ﬁrst-order, second-order and third-order
polynomial ﬁtting curves.
From these ﬁgures, it can be seen that the ﬁrst-order
polynomial can already reﬂect the relationship between
illumination and output current well. When the order is
increased, the ﬁtting results obtained will not have signiﬁcant
improvement. Therefore, we can use Eq. (5) to characterize
their relationship. In addition, by using the least square
method, the parameters in Eq. (5) can be given byp1 =0 .002
and p2 = −14.530.
Based on Eq. (5), the rationality of Eq. (6) can be veriﬁed
as follows. We collected 8 sets of data, where each set of data
includes the variation of the ambient illuminance ΔGand the
variation of the environmental magnetic ﬁeld collected by the
sensor node ΔBm. By measuring the relative position of the
solar panel and the geomagnetic sensor on the sensor node,
we can obtain the values of r, sinα1 and sinα2 in Eq. (6)
and further calculate the theoretical variation caused by the
change in ambient illumination. Fig. 8 shows the values of
ΔBm and the theoretical variation of the data in the same
set. It can be seen from Fig. 8 that the average relative
error between the measured variation and the theoretical
variation is 5.87%. Therefore, we can estimate the variation
of magnetic ﬁeld caused by illumination using Eq. (6).
B. Parking Detection Accuracy Test
To test the accuracy of the parking detection scheme, we
deploy a sensor node on the lane line, as shown in Fig. 9.
2023 IEEE Global Communications Conference: IoT and Sensor Networks
1064
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on December 11,2024 at 05:22:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 6 =====

Fig. 9. Test scenario
TABLE I
DETECTION ACCURACY
Relative position
of vehicle
and sensor node
Lateral distance
between vehicle
and sensor node
Number of
data sets
Detection
Accuracy
CNP
0.3m 50 98%
0.7m 50 98%
1m 50 88%
CP
0.3m 50 100%
0.7m 50 100%
1m 50 98%
The raw geomagnetic ﬁeld data collected by the sensor node
in real time can be stored through the laptop. And we use a
camera to record the actual situation of the test.
To calculate the detection rate of parking events, as shown
in TABLE I, we consider different scenarios according to the
relative position of the vehicle and the sensor node and the
lateral distance between them. As can be seen from TABLE
I, when the vehicle is close to the sensor node, the detection
accuracy is high. However, when the distance reaches 1
meter, due to the obvious attenuation of the magnetic ﬁeld,
the amplitude of the magnetic ﬁeld data collected by the
sensor is small. Therefore, the detection accuracy decreases.
Especially in CNP, when the lateral distance between the
vehicle and the sensor node is equal to 1 meter, the detection
rate is greatly reduced. This is because the distance between
the vehicle and the sensor node in this case is the largest of
the six cases in TABLE I. Due to the same amount of data
in each scenario, taking the average of all accuracy rates in
TABLE I can result in a detection accuracy of 97% for the
parking detection scheme.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, an abnormal parking detection scheme based
on geomagnetic sensor deployed in highway scenario is pro-
posed. In order to improve the accuracy of abnormal parking
detection, this paper focuses on the problem of false detection
caused by the changes in ambient light. First, an equivalent
magnetic ﬁeld model around the solar panel is established.
Then, we analyze the differences between the magnetic ﬁeld
changes caused by illumination and those caused by real
parking, and propose an abnormal parking detection scheme
to distinguish between false detection and real parking. The
test results show that the magnetic ﬁeld model of the solar
panel can better reﬂect the real environmental magnetic ﬁeld,
and the accuracy of the designed algorithm is 97%.
For future work, we will comprehensively consider the
inﬂuence of vehicle type and vehicle speed on the magnetic
ﬁeld waveform to further improve the performance of our
parking detection scheme.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research is supported by NSFC grant, Grant number:
U21A20446.
REFERENCES
[1] G. Mao, Y . Hui, X. Ren, C. Li and Y . Shao, ”The Internet of
Things for Smart Roads: A Road Map From Present to Future Road
Infrastructure,” IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems Magazine,
early access, 2022.
[2] A. Floris, R. Girau, S. Porcu, G. Pettorru and L. Atzori, ”Imple-
mentation of a Magnetometer based Vehicle Detection System for
Smart Parking applications,” 2020 IEEE International Smart Cities
Conference (ISC2), 2020, pp. 1-7.
[3] H. Zhu, S. Feng and F. Yu, ”Parking Detection Method Based on
Finite-State Machine and Collaborative Decision-Making,” in IEEE
Sensors Journal, vol. 18, no. 23, pp. 9829-9839, Dec, 2018.
[4] Z. Zhang, X. Mao, K. Zhou and H. Yuan, ”Collaborative Sensing-
Based Parking Tracking System With Wireless Magnetic Sensor Net-
work,” in IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 20, no. 9, pp. 4859-4867, May,
2020.
[5] J. Gu, Z. Zhang, F. Yu and Q. Liu, ”Design and implementation of
a street parking system using wireless sensor networks,” IEEE 10th
International Conference on Industrial Informatics, 2012, pp. 1212-
1217.
[6] P. ˇSoli´c, A. Leoni, R. Colella, T. Perkovi ´c, L. Catarinucci and V .
Stornelli, ”IoT-Ready Energy-Autonomous Parking Sensor Device,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 4830-4840, 15
March, 2021.
[7] D. Norte, ”Estimating Electromagnetic Interference From Solar Panels
For Space Vehicles,” 2019 IEEE International Symposium on Electro-
magnetic Compatibility, Signal & Power Integrity (EMC+SIPI), 2019,
pp. 487-492.
[8] Z. Chen et al., ”Roadside Sensor Based Vehicle Counting Incomplex
Trafﬁc Environment,” 2019 IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps),
2019, pp. 1-5.
[9] W. Balid, H. Taﬁsh and H. H. Refai, ”Intelligent Vehicle Counting
and Classiﬁcation Sensor for Real-Time Trafﬁc Surveillance,” IEEE
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 19, no. 6, pp.
1784-1794, June 2018.
[10] H. Zhu, S. Feng and F. Yu, ”Parking Detection Method Based on
Finite-State Machine and Collaborative Decision-Making,” in IEEE
Sensors Journal, vol. 18, no. 23, pp. 9829-9839, Dec, 2018.
[11] N. Wahlstrom and F. Gustafsson, Magnetometer modeling and valida-
tion for tracking metallic targets, IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 62,
no. 3, pp. 545-556, Feb. 2014.
[12] Y . Feng et al., ”MagMonitor: Vehicle Speed Estimation and Vehicle
Classiﬁcation Through A Magnetic Sensor,” IEEE Transactions on
Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 1311-1322, Feb.
2022.
[13] J. Xie et al., The simulations and experiments of the electromagnetic
tracking system based on magnetic dipole model, IEEE Trans. Appl.
Supercond., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1-4, Jun. 2014.
[14] Q. Wang, J. Zheng, H. Xu, B. Xu and R. Chen, ”Roadside Magnetic
Sensor System for Vehicle Detection in Urban Environments,” IEEE
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 19, no. 5, pp.
1365-1374, May 2018.
[15] Bao, Xu, Li, et al, ”Trafﬁc Vehicle Counting in Jam Flow Conditions
Using Low-Cost and Energy-Efﬁcient Wireless Magnetic Sensors,”
Sensors 2016. V ol. 16, Pages 1868.
2023 IEEE Global Communications Conference: IoT and Sensor Networks
1065
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on December 11,2024 at 05:22:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 