

===== PAGE 1 =====

IEEE International Workshop on Intelligent Data Acquisition and Advanced Computing Systems: Technology and Applications 
21-23 September 2009, Rende (Cosenza), Italy 
 
Automatic Vehicle Classification Using Wireless Magnetic 
Sensor 
Saowaluck Kaewkamnerd1, Ronachai Pongthornseri1, Jatuporn Chinrungrueng1, Teerapol Silawan2 
1 National Electronics and Computer Technology Center, Thailand 
2 Chulalongkorn University, Thailand 
 
Abstract – This paper proposes an extension to our 
previous work on an automatic low-computed vehicle 
classification using embedded wireless magnetic sensor. A 
realization of our vehicle classification on embedded wireless 
magnetic sensor is studied in this work. The implementation 
allows real-time vehicle classification based on vehicle 
magnetic length, averaged energy, and Hill-pattern peaks.  
The system automatically detects vehicles, extracts features, 
and classifies them. The three features are of low-
computation. We classify vehicles into 4 types: motorcycle, 
car, pickup and van). The cla ssification shows a promising 
result. It can classify motorcycle with 95% accuracy. The 
classification rates between 70%-80% are achieved with car, 
pickup and van due to their similarity in these extracted 
features. The results obtained are comparable to our 
implementation using PC in our previous work and 
demonstrate that the algorithm can be realized on the 
embedded wireless magnetic sensor.  
 
Keywords – vehicle classification, magnetic sensor, wireless 
sensor network 
I. INTRODUCTION 
For traffic management, the vehicle classification is 
important in several applications. For example, automatic 
toll collection requires that different vehicle type is 
charged differently. Road construction and maintenance 
must be planed using statistic data of road usage as higher 
grade of materials must be employed when the roads must 
support larger trucks. To control the road access is another 
application of vehicle classification. In order to develop a 
practical classification system, some requirements have to 
be considered such as high accuracy of classification with 
low-computation, robustness to various weather 
conditions, and ease of installation and maintenance. 
Existing several classification systems are based on 
inductive loop sensor, magnetic sensor, video camera, 
ultrasonic device and infrared camera [1]. Between them, 
magnetic sensor is of smaller size, easier installation and 
maintenance, more power efficient with high sensitivity. 
Magnetic sensor has been used in many classification 
systems. Michael J. Caruso and Luckey S. Withanawasam 
propose the use of three-axis Anisotropic 
Magnetoresistive (AMR) sensor in several vehicle 
applications including classification [2]. Sing Y. Cheung 
and et.al, also propose a simple classification scheme 
based on AMR sensor to classify vehicle into five types as 
in [3],[4]. The magnitudes of magnetic length of three 
axes are used for classification giving a promising 
classification rate. Multiple sensors which include video, 
infrared and piezoelectric sensor  are employed as in [5]. 
Using multiple sets of information from various sensors 
may achieve better accuracy, but also increases more 
complexity and computation re sources. In “Ref. [6]” we 
design a wireless magnetic sensor that provides an 
implementation of real-tim e classification system. 
However, we only employ one set of three-axis magnetic 
sensors which do not allow vehicle speed estimation. The 
speed estimation is therefore obtained with video data and 
thus the system is not self-contained. The result is very 
promising. We work on an extension of our previous work 
such that a self-contained wireless magnetic sensor is 
achieved.  
In this paper, an enhanced self-contained system is 
proposed. We use magnetic sensor because of its 
robustness to weather, ease of installation, and low 
maintenance cost. We separate the classification into two 
parts. In the first part, the sensor board detects vehicle and 
computes relative vehicle length and occupancy time. The 
board then samples magnetic signal and transmits these 
samples to the PC along with the length and occupancy 
time information.  In the second part, the PC computes the 
other two features i.e. averaged energy and number of 
Hill-pattern peaks. We empl oy all three features for 
classification. Due to time constraint in preparing this 
manuscript we extract averag ed energy and number of 
Hill-pattern peaks using a PC, but their simplicities make 
them possible to be computed real-time by 
microcontroller. 
In Section II, the architectur e of the proposed system is 
shown. The detection mechan ism of vehicle arrival and 
departure is explained in Section III. The feature 
extraction and classification processes are described in 
Section IV and Section V. Th en, the experimental results 
are reported in Section VI. Finally, the conclusion is in 
Section VII. 
II. O
VERVIEW OF THE PROPOSED SYSTEM 
In “Fig. 1”, the system architecture of vehicle 
classification system is shown. The proposed system 
consists of magnetic sensor board, RS232 transceiver 
board and personal computer. The CC1000 RF 

===== PAGE 2 =====

communication board is not active except for transmitting 
data via wireless network. On magnetic sensor board, 
MSP430F449 is the main processor which has many 
peripherals embedded inside such as A/D converter, timer 
module, UART and digital I/O port. Two 12-bit-ADCs 
convert analog signal from magnetic sensor to 4 bytes 
digital data. Timer module sets a sampling period to 
approximately 10,000 samples per second. UART module 
communicates and transmits sampled magnetic signal and 
relative vehicle length to the PC for further operations. 
Digital I/O port drives LED status and controls set/reset 
circuit for refreshing sensitivity of magnetic sensor every 
2 seconds (upon the applications). 
 
12Bit
ADC
UART
1INA
INA
MSP430F449
Timer
B
Digital I/O
RS232
Transceiver
Board
CC1000
RF
communication
Board
Set/Reset
Circuit
Antenna
Magnetic Sensor Board
3.3VDC Regulator
Z1
Z2
JTAG
Program&Debug
12VDC INPUT
Magnetic Sensor Test System
Signal Processing PC
HMC1001
HMC1001
 
Fig. 1. System Architecture. 
 
Two magnetoresistive sensors (HMC1001) are 
employed to sense density of earth magnetic field. These 
two sensors are separated from each other at a certain 
distance and allow vehicle speed estimation. The structure 
of sensor is nickel-iron thin film strip deposited on silicon 
wafer and arranged to Wheatstone bridge. By applying 
voltage to sensor, the output voltage can be measured. The 
variation of output voltage is related to a variation of the 
strip resistance upon magnetic flux density. This output 
voltage variation is too small. An amplifier is needed to 
magnify the signal. Two cascades amplifiers with total 
approximately gain of 100 are used for this purpose. The 
first one is instrument amplifier which has a common 
mode rejection characteristic and high impedance 
balanced input while the second one is the amplifier with 
active filter for reducing ripple of signal. 
RS232 transceiver board is used for converting 3.3 
logical voltage signal of magnetic sensor board to RS232 
line level before transmitting to personal computer. At 
computer side, this transmitted magnetic signal is further 
analyzed in feature extraction and classification process. 
III. V
EHICLE DETECTION 
First, vehicle detection is performed by magnetic sensor 
board processor. Since, the magnetic sensor board has 
limitation on computation and resources, only the earth 
magnetic field in z-axis is used for vehicle detection. In 
first stage, the earth magnetic fields of the sensor locations 
are set to be the base line b
1 and b 2 as shown in “Fig. 2”. 
In normal situation, earth magnetic field variation has very 
small change, however, when a vehicle is present, the 
magnetic field will be disturbed and results in noticeable 
larger changes. If the magnitudes of earth magnetic field 
comparing to base line of both sensors are greater then the 
threshold th for a certain period of time T
d, it is considered 
as vehicle arrival. Otherwise, it is considered as a noise. 
Let z be z-axis magnetic time series observed by sensor.  
z
n = z-axis magnetic field at time sample n, 
bi = magnetic base line of sensor i,  
th b zi n≥ −                                  (1) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2. Vehicle detection scheme. 
 
When vehicle arrival is detected, the follow z-axis 
magnetic signal is gathered and smoothed. To smooth the 
signal in time series, we perform moving average over 8 
samples: 
 
8
7
0
∑
=
−
= i
i n
M
n
z
z                             (2) 
Where is moving average z-axis at time sample n. 
Superscript M represents a moving average sample. 
M
nz
 
Every 10 milliseconds (ms) of moving average 
signal, is sent to personal computer through RS232 
transceiver board. The signal transmission is stopped 
when vehicle departure is de tected. The vehicle departure 
is determined as same as the arrival except the magnitudes 
of earth magnetic field comparing to base line of both 
sensors are less than the threshold for a certain period of 
time T
d. Otherwise, it is considered that the vehicle still 
occupies the sensor. 
M
nz
th b zi n≤ −                                 (3) 
b1 
th
-th 
Time 
Earth Magnetic Field 
First point 
th
b2 
-th 
First sensor 
Second sensor 
Second point 
Td 
First point Second point 
T1 T2 
Tn 

===== PAGE 3 =====

IV. FEATURE EXTRACTIONS 
Features using for classification are relative vehicle 
length, averaged energy and numbers of Hill-pattern peak.  
Relative vehicle length is obtained during vehicle 
detection by magnetic sensor board. Averaged energy and 
numbers of Hill-pattern peak are obtained by personal 
computer. 
A. Relative Vehicle Length (please correct this part) 
Two sensors are installed on the magnetic sensor board 
with an inch apart. The signal delay between two sensors 
is used to calculate the relative speed of a vehicle. Let d be 
the distance between the two sensors in inch, N be the 
number of delay samples and v be the estimated vehicle 
speed. 
d N v/=                                   (4) 
The number of delay samples N is obtained based on 
the two-stage scheme. In Firs t stage, when the vehicle 
arrival is detected by one sensor, the counter C is reset and 
increments at every sample it  monitors. The increment is 
stopped if the second sensor detects the arrival of that 
vehicle. The value of counter C represents the delay 
sample D
s of two sensors within the delay period Tn in 
“Fig. 2”.  
In second stage, we further explore the entire samples 
from arrival to departure to find the zero-crossing points. 
The zero-crossing point is the point where the signal 
crosses the base line of the sensor between the threshold 
boundaries. The crossing point inside the threshold 
boundaries is not considered as zero-crossing point. It is 
possible to have more than one zero-crossing point as in 
“Fig. 2”. If the zero-crossing point is found, the number of 
delay samples N  is obtained as in (5). Otherwise, the 
number of delay samples N is set to D
s.  
Z
N
i
T
N
S
N
Z
i∑
== 1                              (5) 
Where Ti is the zero-crossing delay period of two 
sensors at i point. 
           is the number of samples in period Ti. 
iTS
            NZ   is the number of zero-crossing point. 
 
After the estimate vehicle speed v is obtained, relative 
length l in inch can be calculated. Let M is the total 
number of samples from arrival to departure. 
v M l/=                                   (6) 
B. Averaged Energy 
Averaged vehicle energy can be employed for 
classification. It gives information on how much effect a 
vehicle has on the earth magnetic  field at the sensor node. 
It is expected that large body vehicles has more effect than 
small body vehicles. Also, the closer the body to the 
sensor node also yields mo re changes of the signal. 
Averaged vehicle energy E is defined the total energy 
of smoothed differential magnitude m
nM , defined as in 
[6], computed during the period over which a ve
 as 
hicle is 
detected, divided by the vehicle magnetic length S 
S
M
E
Peroid
Detected
Vehicle
m
n∑
=                             (7) 
C.
consecutive r than a threshold. 
ased on combination of the three 
features by path 2. 
 Number of Hill-pattern peak 
Hill pattern is used in [3]. It is a pattern extracted from 
magnitude signal based on its slope. Hill-pattern is 
employed as it is believed that different vehicles possess 
different parts of structures and different numbers of 
axles. This is represented as  the number of peaks in the 
Hill-pattern. We represent positive slope with 1 and 
negative slope with 0. A peak is considered valid when a 
 number of samples are large
V. CLASSIFICATION 
We perform classification based on three features, 
relative vehicle length, averaged energy and number of 
Hill-pattern peaks into 4 types of vehicles: motorcycle, 
car, pickup and van. We propose a simple classification 
based on hierarchical tree methodology as in [6]. In “Fig. 
3”, the motorcycles’ relative length, averaged energy, and 
number of Hill-pattern peaks are much lower than the 
other types of vehicles. These three features are employed 
in path 1 to mainly identify motorcycles and cars. A more 
thorough look into the groups of cars, pickup, and vans is 
then considered b
Start
b1≤L ≤b2
motorcycle car
path 1
e1≤E E >e1
motorcycle
P=0 P=1
path 2
P=2
b2<L≤b3
P=1
pickup vancar
E<e2 e2≤E≤e3 E >e3
P=7
pickup vancar
E<e2 e2≤E≤e3 E >e3
P=2 P=4P=3 P=5 P=6
 
g. 3. Classification tree based on the three features: relativeFi  
vehicle length, averaged energy, and Hill-pattern peaks. 

===== PAGE 4 =====

VI. RESULTS 
We setup the system by placing our magnetic sensor 
board on the middle of the lane about 5 meters behind the 
entering gate where a vehicle must enter with low speed. 
This allows us to collect magnetic signal with not much 
speed variation. With the sensors on magnetic sensor 
board, we obtain the earth magnetic field variation of both 
sensors in z-axis. Z-axis is the direction perpendicular to 
the ground pointing upward. The total number of vehicles 
we observed is 130. That consists of 24 motorcycles, 57 
cars, 35 pickups and 14 vans. We do the data analysis on 
observed vehicles as follows. 
 
A. Distribution of Relative Vehicle Length 
“Fig. 4” shows the distribution of relative vehicle length 
of all 4 types of observed vehicles. We observe that the 
distribution of motorcycle length is clearly separated from 
the others types while the distributions of car, pickup and 
van are very much overlapped. It means that only relative 
vehicle length can be used to clearly classify motorcycles. 
However, in order to classify car, pickup and van, 
additional features are required. 
B. Distribution of Averaged Energy 
“Fig. 5” shows the distribution of averaged energy of 4 
types of vehicles. Due to the size of the motorcycles, their 
averaged energy should be smaller than others but the 
distribution of motorcycles in “Fig. 5” is not much 
different from the others. This is because the sensors can 
detect the motorcycles only when they pass by very closer 
to the sensors that makes high earth magnetic field 
variations. This feature is not useful for classifying 
motorcycle from other types. 
In “Fig. 6”, we focus on the distribution of car, pickup 
and van. The graph shows that the van’s average energy 
distribution is relatively higher than car and pickup. We 
can take advantage of this feature to classify van from car 
and pickup. The distributions of car and pickup are almost 
the same.  
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 260 280 300 320 340
Relative Vehicle Length (inch)
Distribution (percent)
Car
Motorcycle
Pickup
Van
 
Fig. 4. Distribution of relative length. 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34
A veraged Energy  (voltage)
Distribution (percent)
Car
Motorcycle
Pickup
Van
 
Fig. 5. Distribution of averaged energy for all types of vehicles. 
 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34
A veraged Energy  (voltage)
Distribution (percent)
Car
Pickup
Van
 
Fig. 6. Distribution of averaged energy for car, pickup and van. 
 
C. Distribution of Number of Hill-pattern Peaks 
“Fig. 7” shows that the distributions of number of Hill-
pattern peaks for 4 types of vehicles. The graph shows that 
the motorcycle yields small number of peaks comparing to 
other types. For other three types, they possess almost all 
number of peaks, especially between 1 and 6.  
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
1234567
Number of Hill-Pattern Peaks
Distribution (percent)
Car
Mortorcycle
Pickup
Van
 
Fig. 7. Distribution of Number of Hill-Pattern Peaks. 
 

===== PAGE 5 =====

Based on above distributions, the relative vehicle length 
is mainly used to classify motorcycle from other types of 
vehicles. All three features are used to classify car, pickup 
and van. The classification process is based on 
hierarchical tree shown in “F ig. 3”. The thresholds are 
chosen as follows: b
1=3, b2=110, b3=300, e1=8, e2 ~ 6-10, 
e3 ~ 12-16. Thresholds e 2 and e3 are expressed in ranges 
because they have to be chosen according to each different 
path. The overall 77.69 per cent of the vehicles are 
classified correctly. In Table 1, the classification results of 
each vehicle type is shown. The motorcycle achieves high 
accuracy 95 percent because the length is clearly 
distinguished to the other three types. The discrimination 
of three types (car, pickup and van) is fuzzy using only the 
length, therefore the furthe r classification are needed 
using number of Hill-pattern peak and averaged energy. 
The accuracies of car, pickup  and van are 68.42, 95.83 
and 71.43 percents respectively. 
Table 1 
CLASSIFICATION RESUTLS 
Vehicle Type Classification Result 
(percent) 
Car 68.42 
Motorcycle 95.83 
Pickup 82.86 
Van 71.43 
 
VII. CONCLUSION 
An automatic vehicle cla ssification system based on 
magnetic sensors for wireless sensor network is proposed. 
All processes of the proposed system such as data 
acquisition, data preprocessi ng, feature extraction and 
classification are automatica lly performed. The system 
consists of magnetic sensor board, RS232 transceiver 
board and personal computer. The magnetic sensor board 
can detect vehicle and computes its relative length. It then 
samples signal and transmits the signal and relative 
vehicle length to the PC through RS232 transceiver board.   
The other two features, aver aged energy and numbers 
of Hill-pattern peak and classification process are operated 
on the PC. The feature extraction and classification 
processes in personal computer can be further 
implemented on magnetic sensor node for real-time 
operations. All three features, relative vehicle length, 
averaged energy and number  of Hill-pattern peaks are 
used for classification process. Based on the results, the 
system classifies vehicles into four types: motorcycle, car, 
pickup and van. The accuracies of car, pickup and van are 
68.42, 82.86 and 71.43 percents, respectively while the 
accuracy of motorcycle is 95. 83 percent. We found that 
the classification based on the length of the vehicle gives 
very high accuracies when the vehicles have length 
distinction (motorcycle). The discrimination of three types 
(car, pickup and van) is fuzzy using only the length, 
therefore the further classifi cation are needed using peak 
and averaged energy. To better separate car, pickup and 
van, the investigation for su itable features is needed. 
However, the feature extraction processes for these 
features must be simple enough to implement on magnetic 
sensor board. 
A
CKNOWLEDGEMENT 
This work is funded by ITS program, NSTDA. The 
authors thank those security officials at the NSTDA’s 
entrance who assist to our experiment and provide safety 
to both drivers and us. 
 
R
EFERENCES 
[1] Lawrence A. Klein, “Sensor technologies for ITS”, powerpoint 
prepared for Transportation Research Board Freeway Operations 
and Signal Systems, Jul. 21-23, 2002.  
[2] Michael J. Caruso, Lucky S. W ithanawasam, “Vehicle detection 
and compass applications using AMR magnetic sensors”, 
www.ssec.honeywell.com 
[3] Sing Y. Cheung and et al., “Traffic measurement and vehicle 
classification with a single magne tic sensors”, working papers 
2004. 
[4] Sing Y. Cheung and et al., “Traffic measurement and vehicle 
classification with a single magnetic sensor”, Technical Report 
prepared for 84
th Annual Meeting Transportation Research Board, 
Jan 2005. 
[5] Weiming Liu, Xueping Zhao, Jingfang Xiao, Youlong Wu, 
“Automatic vehicle classificati on instrument based on multiple 
sensor information fusion”, Proceedings of Third International 
Conference on Information Technol ogy and Applications, vol. 1, 
pp. 379-382, July 2005. 
[6] Saowaluck Kaewkamnerd, Jat uporn Chinrungrueng, Chaipat 
Jaruchart, “Vehicle classification with low computation magnetic 
sensor”, The 8
th International Conference on ITS 
Telecommunication, pp.164-169, October 2008. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 