

===== PAGE 1 =====

IET Intelligent Transport Systems
Review Article
Smart parking sensors, technologies and
applications for open parking lots: a review
ISSN 1751-956X
Received on 13th December 2017
Revised 12th March 2018
Accepted on 17th April 2018
E-First on 18th May 2018
doi: 10.1049/iet-its.2017.0406
www.ietdl.org
Vijay Paidi1 
 , Hasan Fleyeh1, Johan Håkansson1, Roger G. Nyberg1
1School of Technology and Business Studies, Dalarna University, Borlänge, Sweden
 E-mail: vpp@du.se
Abstract: Parking a vehicle in traffic dense environments often leads to excess time of driving in search for free space which
leads to congestions and environmental pollution. Lack of guidance information to vacant parking spaces is one reason for
inefficient parking behaviour. Smart parking sensors and technologies facilitate guidance of drivers to free parking spaces
thereby improving parking efficiency. Currently, no such sensors or technologies is in use for open parking lot. This study
reviews the literature on the usage of smart parking sensors, technologies, applications and evaluates their applicability to open
parking lots. Magnetometers, ultrasonic sensors and machine vision were few of the widely used sensors and technologies on
closed parking lots. However, this study suggests a combination of machine vision, convolutional neural network or multi-agent
systems suitable for open parking lots due to less expenditure and resistance to varied environmental conditions. Few smart
parking applications show drivers the location of common open parking lots. No application provided real-time parking
occupancy information, which is a necessity to guide them along the shortest route to free space. To develop smart parking
applications for open parking lots, further research is needed in the fields of deep learning and multi-agent systems.
1 Introduction
In densely populated areas as in cities, the availability of parking
spaces is often less than the availability of vehicles which leads to
a shortage of parking space [ 1]. Studies showed that in worldwide
traffic dense environment, 30–50% of the drivers look for free
parking space [ 2–5]. Based on previous studies, drivers use
between 3.5 and 14 min to find a parking space [6, 7]. Examples of
consequences are: the frustration of drivers, accidents, lost business
opportunities, congestion and increased air pollution. Congestion
can be observed when traffic density is increased, which is
observed during peak traffic periods [ 8, 9]. A city with a
population of ∼50,000 inhabitants contains an average of 250
parking spaces in a parking lot which would generate an annual
cost of ∼216,000 US dollars [10].
In order to reduce parking related congestion and air pollution,
public transportations such as bus, metro and so on can be utilised.
However, private vehicles are still used for convenience. One way
to address the carbon emission issue is to replace all fuel
consumption vehicles with electric ones. Since, the average age of
a car in Europe or the USA is ∼11 years (USA) [ 11, 12], it can be
expected to take quite a long time before electric vehicles replace
all fuel consumption vehicles. In spite of using electric vehicles,
cruising of a vehicle to find a vacant parking space would still be
time consuming leading to congestion. A solution to that problem
might be driverless cars. The driverless vehicle is one of the
upcoming technologies currently being developed. Few companies
such as Google have already developed prototype vehicles which
support driverless mode in specific conditions [ 13]. With the
current state of automation and proven technologies, new
generation vehicles are providing park assist feature which helps in
parking a car automatically with the use of sensors and guidance
systems. Vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) technology could be
implemented on all vehicles in order to improve the safety of all
driverless vehicles [14, 15]. An automated driverless vehicle would
depend on a number of technologies such as global positioning
system (GPS), sensors, V2V and so on and it would take few
decades to replace existing vehicles. Yet another, not that far-
fetched, solution might be a decision support system that uses
smart parking sensor and technologies to detect parking occupancy
information which facilitates the drivers to make informed decision
of where to go and park their car [ 16]. Parking occupancy
information can be gathered using sensors and technologies such as
ultrasonic sensors, magnetometers and multi-agent systems. Smart
parking applications are available online which facilitate in
improving parking efficiency by providing navigational directions
to a reserved empty parking space [17].
There has already been a considerable amount of research
conducted to improve parking efficiency at closed parking lots
which are paid parking lots and support reservation of parking
spaces. There are online applications which provide smart parking
services in closed parking lots. However, literature is very scarce
with regard to another and very common type of parking lot, the
open parking lots which do not support reservation, freely available
for a limited amount of time and are commonly placed outdoors
occupying a large amount of space. Therefore, there still exists a
research gap in order to improve parking efficiency at an open
parking lot. It is assumed that the driver behaviour could be
efficient if improved decision support to drivers is offered. The
areal size of the often very large open parking lots could be
reduced by improving parking efficiency along with reduced
congestion and CO2 emissions.
The aim of this paper is to review smart parking sensors,
technologies and applications suitability at open parking lots.
Challenges in an open parking lot are: freely available where the
reservation is not possible and they are subjected to environmental
conditions when placed outdoors. Therefore, suitability of sensors
and technologies was made by compatibility and expenditure
parameters.
The remaining part of this paper is organised in the following
way. Section 2 describes the methods used to conduct the review of
existing smart parking sensors, technologies and applications.
Section 3 describes and analyses smart parking sensors,
technologies and applications while Section 4 discusses about their
suitability in open parking lots. Finally, the paper is ended with
conclusion in Section 5.
2 Method
In this paper, literature search was carried out to identify articles
related to smart parking sensors and technologies. Smart or
intelligent parking has been in focus since early 1980s and there
IET Intell. Transp. Syst., 2018, Vol. 12 Iss. 8, pp. 735-741
© The Institution of Engineering and Technology 2018
735


===== PAGE 2 =====

are several papers discussing the implementation of sensors or
technologies for improving parking efficiency. This paper will not
review about parking requirements and income generated due to
parking. Similarly, frameworks or architecture of smart parking
systems are also not reviewed in this paper. This paper focuses on
sensors, technologies and interfaces which are used to collect and
display real-time parking occupancy information. The suitability of
sensors and technologies is made in terms of compatibility and
expenditure. Since, the majority of open parking lots are placed
outdoors, compatibility is measured in terms of varying
environment and lighting conditions while expenditure is measured
in terms of purchase cost, installation and maintenance activities.
Parking meters which are used for payments are placed either at a
parking lot or beside parking spaces are not referred in this paper.
From the literature search, literature reviews on sensors and
technologies are presented in Table 1. However, it should be
mentioned that these reviews do not emphasise on parking issues
related to open parking lots. 
Existing smart parking applications were searched using mobile
application stores and web search engines. There are hundreds of
parking applications available in the mobile application store.
However, in this paper parking applications which provide real-
time parking occupancy information and navigational directions to
a reserved parking space are selected. All the referred applications
support reservation which is possible only in closed parking lots.
Smart parking applications also provide navigational directions to
the reserved parking space in a closed parking lot.
3 Smart parking tools
Smart parking tools consist of sensors, technologies and
applications which are used to identify parking occupancy
information and facilitate to improve parking efficiency. Found
literature reviews on smart parking technologies and sensors are
shown in Table 1. In this context, literatures [ 18–20] are reviews
about various types of smart parking sensors, technologies along
with their uses while [ 21] identifies research gap in designing
smart parking system for stakeholders. Furthermore, [ 22] reviews
about intelligent parking technologies and their economic analysis
and [23, 24] reviews the advantages and drawbacks of sensors and
technologies. As shown in Table 1, machine vision using visual
camera is referred by all the review articles. Sensors like ultrasonic
and magnetometers are widely reviewed and tested which are used
in various smart parking applications. Vehicular ad hoc  networks
(V ANET) and fuzzy logic were not reviewed prior to 2013. A
detailed description of each sensor and technology can be found in
this section along with an emphasis on expenditure.
3.1 Smart parking sensors
There are various sensors which facilitate in detecting parking
occupancy information and these are mentioned in the following
sections. Sensors are one of the common tools which were widely
tested in several previous literatures. Descriptions of these sensors
are mentioned in the following sections.
3.1.1 Passive infrared sensor: These sensors detect changes in
energy and when a vehicle occupies a parking space, these sensors
identify the change in energy and detect occupancy [ 25, 26]. The
sensor observes a change in energy when a vehicle is placed or a
person standing above the sensor. Based on the amount of energy
change, it can be used to isolate outliers. However, these sensors
are sensitive to environment and they would not be accurate when
there is snow or rain. Passive infrared sensors should be placed
under the ground or on the ceiling. Therefore, they require high
investment for procurement and maintenance of these sensors.
These sensors would be suitable for closed parking lots which are
inside buildings and are not suitable for outdoor open parking lots.
3.1.2 Active infrared sensor: These sensors would emit infrared
energy and detect any object or vehicle by the amount of energy
reflected [25, 26]. They are also sensitive to environmental changes
such as rain or snow. Therefore, they should be placed in all the
parking spaces and require high investment and maintenance.
Deploying sensors in all the parking spaces would help to attain
parking occupancy status. These sensors are usually placed
overhead and are suitable for indoor closed parking lots. As these
sensors are sensitive to environmental changes, it is not suitable to
open parking lots.
3.1.3 Ultrasonic sensor: These sensors would emit sound waves
between 25 and 50  kHz and detect objects based on reflected
energy. They are usually mounted on the ceiling and are sensitive
to environmental changes such as rain and snow [ 27]. Therefore,
they are suitable for indoor parking lots rather than open parking
lots. Based on the distance at which waves are reflected it can
distinguish between a vehicle and a person. In order to get parking
occupancy status, these sensors should be placed on top of every
parking space. These sensors would be available for low cost but
installation and maintenance of multiple sensors and connecting
them to a grid would be expensive in the long run. Wireless
ultrasonic sensors are also used to gather parking occupancy
information. They are connected using wireless sensor networks
such as ZigBee protocol or other similar networks [ 28]. However,
wireless sensors involve periodic maintenance costs. In another
study, ultrasonic sensors are used on a drive-by vehicle and parking
occupancy information is collected at regular periods [ 29]. Real-
time parking occupancy information cannot be attained using the
drive-by vehicle.
3.1.4 Inductive loop detectors: These detectors are installed
using underground wiring system and they use principles of
electromagnetism to detect the presence of a vehicle [ 25]. They are
commonly used at the entrance and exit to know the count of the
vehicles which can be used to know the availability of parking
spaces. These detectors are expensive to install and maintain [ 26]
Table 1 Literature reviews on smart parking sensors and technologies
Smart parking tools [19] [24] [18] [22] [21] [20] [23]
infrared sensors • • • • •
ultrasonic sensors • • • • • •
inductive loop detectors • • •
parking guidance systems • • •
radio frequency tags • • • •
magnetometer • • • • •
microwave radar • •
GPS • • • •
machine vision • • • • • • •
vehicular ad hoc networks • •
multi-agent systems • • • •
neural network • •
fuzzy logic • •
 
736 IET Intell. Transp. Syst., 2018, Vol. 12 Iss. 8, pp. 735-741
© The Institution of Engineering and Technology 2018
 17519578, 2018, 8, Downloaded from https://ietresearch.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1049/iet-its.2017.0406, Wiley Online Library on [21/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


===== PAGE 3 =====

and they are commonly used in indoor parking lots to get the count
of available parking spaces. An accurate count of vehicles would
be provided using these detectors in a closed parking lot and these
are in use at multiple commercial parking lots. However, individual
parking occupancy status cannot be attained using inductive loop
detectors.
3.1.5 Parking guidance systems: Parking guidance systems is
another smart parking system which provides information about
number of parking spaces available on display screens and these
are usually placed near the parking lots as the driver can see and
decide the parking space to occupy [ 28, 30]. Inductive loop
detectors or visual camera can be used at the entrance and exit of a
parking lot to know the count of the vehicles in a parking lot which
would be displayed on the screens. However, they do not guide the
driver to a particular parking space which is found empty.
Therefore, there is every possibility that the driver would cruise for
several minutes before finding an empty space to occupy. The
driver can make a decision about the parking lot only after viewing
the display screens [ 27]. Since sensors or visual cameras would be
deployed only to get the count of vehicles, the expenditure for
installation and maintenance would be minimal making them
suitable for open parking lots.
3.1.6 Radio-frequency identification (RFID): Radio frequency
tags are used to identify vehicle. Each vehicle will be given a radio
frequency tag for identification. A transceiver and antenna would
be installed at the entrance of a parking lot to identify the tag and
allow the vehicle to occupy a parking lot [ 31]. These are suited for
closed and indoor parking lots which are controlled. It is not
suitable for an open parking lot as they are freely available. RFID
is used to authorise movement of vehicles at a parking lot.
However, it neither provides individual parking occupancy status
nor facilitates the driver in finding a vacant parking space.
3.1.7 Magnetometer: These sensors detect the presence of
vehicle by detecting the change in electromagnetic field. They need
to be in close proximity to the vehicle, therefore, they are placed
beneath the surface. They are not sensitive to the environment [25].
These are suitable for both open and closed parking lots. There are
wireless sensors with a battery life time of few years which can be
used to detect real-time parking occupancy information. The
sensors should be placed under every parking space to know the
occupancy of parking spaces. However, it is expensive to install
and maintain these sensors on a large scale.
3.1.8 Microwave radar: A microwave radar transmits microwave
beam and based on the reflected signal it estimates the velocity of
the moving target. However, it does not detect stationary objects. In
order to eliminate this restriction, dual microwave Doppler radar
can be used to detect both moving and stationary vehicles [ 32].
These can be mounted or placed beneath the surface for vehicle
detection. These radars are not sensitive to environment and can be
used in open and closed parking lots. They should be placed in
every parking space to detect parking occupancy status making
them expensive to install and maintain these microwave radars on a
large scale.
3.2 Smart parking technologies
Sensor technologies are tools which facilitate the driver in
occupying a vacant parking space and descriptions of these
technologies can be found in the following sections below.
3.2.1 Global positioning system: GPS-based navigational
directions are provided to the driver for occupying a vacant parking
space. GPS will facilitate in finding the shortest/optimal route from
the current location. However, GPS alone cannot gather occupancy
information of parking spaces. In one study occupancy of parking
spaces is estimated using historical occupancy information and
navigational directions are provided using GPS to the estimated
parking space [ 33]. The accuracy of the GPS with a single-
frequency receiver is ≤7.8 m. If a dual-frequency receiver is used,
the accuracy is <0.71  m. A normal parking space would be
between 2.3 and 2.7  m and most of the smartphones are provided
with single-frequency receiver which has higher error compared to
dual-frequency receivers. Dual-frequency receivers are usually
used for military products for greater accuracy. A GPS is also
perceptible to errors when the signal is blocked due to tall towers,
walls within a building or under the ground. Therefore,
navigational directions using GPS will be prone to errors in a
closed indoor parking lot. Usage of GPS is suited for outdoor open
parking lots where there is less chance for signal blocking.
Accuracy of the GPS signal is also dependent on availability of
satellite.
3.2.2 Machine vision: A visual camera can be used for license
plate recognition (LPR) or identifying parking lot occupancy using
machine vision. The camera should be placed near the entrance of
a closed parking lot for LPR. Based on the number of vehicles
entered and exited it can help to get the count of vacant parking
spaces. However, occupancy status of parking spaces cannot be
attained using this system. Video processing of parking lot using a
camera is not ideal as it requires continuous transfer of large
bandwidths. Therefore, a video should be broken into images at
regular intervals and frame rates to facilitate continuous monitoring
of the parking lot [ 23]. For parking spaces occupancy detection, a
camera can be installed overhead to a parking lot and relevant
image detection algorithms can be used to segment vehicles and
detect occupancy of parking space. There are publicly available
datasets such as PKLot [ 34] which consists of large number of
outdoor parking lot images. In one of the studies, support vector
machine classifier produced 89% accuracy on their test dataset.
Similar image classification algorithms such as logistic regression,
Viola and Jones [35] also produced higher accuracy results [ 36]. A
camera is suited for open parking lots as it can cover large number
of parking spaces [ 37]. However, it is susceptible to limitations
such as occlusion and shadow effects, distortion and lighting
change. These limitations can be removed with the use of 3D scene
information [38]. Since limited number of cameras can cover large
number of parking spaces, the expenditure is considered minimal.
3.2.3 Vehicular ad hoc networks: This system uses wireless
communication devices to provide services such as smart parking
and antitheft. Road side unites (RSUs) would be widely placed
across parking lots and vehicles should be installed with on-board
units (OBU). A trusted authority will be responsible for
registrations of OBU and RSUs [ 39] Therefore, once a vehicle
approaches the parking lot installed with RSUs, navigational
information to the vacant parking space will be provided to OBU.
The OBU's can also be used by the vehicles to avoid collision
while driving. Such features are also incorporated in self-driving
vehicles. These devices are not sensitive to environment and are
suitable for closed and open parking lots. However, installation and
maintenance of RSUs in the parking lot would be expensive. In
order to achieve accurate parking occupancy data and navigational
information, all the vehicles must install OBU. Parking occupancy
data is prone to errors if there are vehicles without OBU are
parked.
3.2.4 Multi-agent systems: These kinds of systems make use of
multiple mediums such as sensors, mobile, algorithms, visual
camera and so on. These systems are also capable of incorporating
aspects such as user preference, importance and so on, in finding a
vacant parking space for the driver. Multi-agent systems are
considered as foundation for automation of smart parking systems.
A user can select a parking space using a mobile or web
application and based on the user importance and preference, a
parking space will be selected. The user will also receive
navigational information to reach the parking space. Java tools
such as JaCaMo and environment such as CArtAgo can be used in
the architecture [ 40]. Machine vision systems or V ANETs can be
used instead of using sensors. Usage of multiple systems is
supported in this architecture. These systems are suitable for both
open and closed parking lots. The expenditure would be dependent
IET Intell. Transp. Syst., 2018, Vol. 12 Iss. 8, pp. 735-741
© The Institution of Engineering and Technology 2018
737
 17519578, 2018, 8, Downloaded from https://ietresearch.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1049/iet-its.2017.0406, Wiley Online Library on [21/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


===== PAGE 4 =====

on the usage of technology to identify occupancy status of parking
spaces.
3.2.5 Neural networks: Neural network is a data processing
system which is inspired by brain nervous system. Neural networks
have evolved over the years and various types of neural networks
were developed such as fuzzy, neural network, fluid neural
network, feed forward and convolutional neural network. Neural
networks can be combined with machine vision to achieve
automation. Neural networks were used in efficient recognition of
license plates in real-time videos [ 41, 42]. In one study, images
from morning and night were taken separately to train the neural
network and a two layered feed-forward network with hidden
sigmoid is used to produce accurate results in detection of available
parking spaces [43]. Deep learning is a branch of machine learning
which uses neural networks in object detection and classification.
There is another evolving technology such as convolutional neural
networks which would take images as input and is more efficient in
analysing images. In a recent study, convolutional neural networks
were used along with machine vision to capture parking occupancy
information efficiently [ 44]. Convolutional neural network was
also used to facilitate a self-driving vehicle. The network was
trained using a set of connected cameras which observe the road
while driving. Using limited training, the vehicle with
convolutional neural network was able to operate on parking lots
and roadways without lane markings [ 45]. This technology would
function as an efficient tool in data processing while it is not
involved in real-time data capturing. Therefore, it is suitable for
open and closed parking lots with minimal expenditure.
3.2.6 Fuzzy logic: Fuzzy logic is an approach which incorporates
multivalued logic in evaluating. Fuzzy logic can be used to develop
forecasting models based on sample data. Similar to neural
networks, fuzzy logic can also be used in multi-agent systems.
According to a study, a sample of parking spaces availability
information for 5 days using machine vision was taken to predict
the availability of parking spaces in future dates using fuzzy logic
[46]. Fuzzy logic supports autonomy in providing information on
the availability of parking spaces. The accuracy of forecast models
would not be high without validating with real-time data.
Therefore, combination of fuzzy logic models with machine vision
or sensor technologies would increase the accuracy of the overall
system. These systems are suitable for both open and closed
parking lots. The expenditure would be minimal if image
processing is used along with fuzzy logic to estimate available
parking spaces for the future as well as provide real-time
availability of parking spaces. Since this technology is not involved
in the real-time data capturing process, it can be used for closed
and open parking lots with minimal expenditure.
Not all of the sensors and technologies are suitable for
gathering real-time occupancy information of open parking lots as
mentioned in Table 2. Even though sensors are widely used to
acquire parking occupancy information, they would be expensive
to install and maintain on a large number of parking spaces. Few
sensors such as infrared and ultrasonic are sensitive to environment
and are not suitable for open parking lots. Technologies such as
machine vision, multi-agent systems are suitable for open parking
lots to acquire parking occupancy information and GPS can be
used to provide navigational directions. 
3.3 Smart parking applications
There are already many free smart parking applications available
online in web and mobile stores of Android or iOS. Previously,
reservation of parking space was done by calling to the service
provider and now with the current usage of internet and
smartphones, these services are provided online using mobile and
web applications. These applications serve as decision support
systems for the driver in occupying a vacant parking space. For
instance, if the application shows a particular parking lot of choice
to be full, the driver can search for nearby parking lots with
available parking spaces or choose another destination. In this way,
smart parking applications serve as decision support systems in
occupying available parking spaces. Smart parking tools improve
efficiency based on the following three categories:
i. Guide the driver to parking lot using display boards.
ii. Reserve and authorise the driver to a parking lot.
iii. Reserve and guide the driver to a specific parking space using
navigational information.
The three categories mentioned earlier are the ways in which
efficiency of parking is improved using existing smart parking
Table 2 Strength and drawbacks of smart parking sensors and technologies in open parking lots
Smart parking
technology
Suitability on
open parking
lots
Strength Drawback
active/passive infrared
sensor
✗ provides parking occupancy status not suitable for open parking lot due to varying
environmental conditions
ultrasonic sensor ✗ provides parking occupancy status not suitable for open parking lot due to varying
environmental conditions
inductive loop detectors ✓ facilitates in getting the count of vehicles
in a parking lot
not suitable for individual parking occupancy status
parking guidance
systems
✓ guide driver to a parking lot based on
count of available parking spaces
do not solve congestion while cruising for parking space
radio frequency tags ✗ facilitates in authorising vehicles in a
parking lot
not suitable for open parking lots and cannot provide
parking occupancy information
magnetometer ✓ provides parking occupancy status expensive to install and maintain on large scale
microwave radar ✓ provides parking occupancy status expensive to install and maintain on large scale
GPS ✓ provides navigational directions to the
parking space
does not provide parking occupancy status and is
subjective to errors
machine vision ✓ provides parking occupancy status or
facilitates in authorising vehicles
challenges with low lighting conditions
VANET ✓ provides parking occupancy status all vehicles should be part of the network without which
will be prone to errors
multi-agent systems ✓ provides parking occupancy status challenges will be based on the technology used
neural networks ✓ facilitates efficient parking occupancy
detection
is used only as a supporting tool in parking occupancy
detection
fuzzy logic ✓ provides parking occupancy status based
on historical data
do not provide real-time parking occupancy
 
738 IET Intell. Transp. Syst., 2018, Vol. 12 Iss. 8, pp. 735-741
© The Institution of Engineering and Technology 2018
 17519578, 2018, 8, Downloaded from https://ietresearch.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1049/iet-its.2017.0406, Wiley Online Library on [21/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


===== PAGE 5 =====

tools. The level of efficiency varies with each category. The first
category would improve the parking efficiency, however cruising
for the empty parking space would still be involved. The second
category reserves a parking space for the driver, however, the
driver would still search for the reserved parking space manually
which also involves some amount of cruising while searching for
the location of reserved parking space. The third category provides
improved efficiency compared to the two previous categories as it
facilitates in reserving and guiding the driver using the navigational
information to the parking space.
The first category to guide the driver to a parking lot was
provided with the use of parking guidance systems. This parking
system facilitates the driver in taking a decision to park the vehicle.
It is suitable to open parking lots as well. The second category
would use RFID or LPR technologies. If a parking space is
reserved by the driver, then RFID or LPR would authorise the
vehicle to park. These are common methods for staff parking in an
organisation and are not applicable to open parking lots. The third
category would use web applications or smartphones to reserve the
parking space and guide the driver using navigational directions
through GPS. Table 3 shows smart parking applications available
online which provide smart parking services as mentioned in the
third category. All the applications are provided in limited cities of
mentioned countries. 
All the applications mentioned in Table 3 provide smart parking
services in closed parking lots which support reservation and all of
them are available in mobile application stores. However, Open
Spot is the only application which is currently unavailable and
discontinued by Google. Navigational directions to the free
available parking space are provided which improve the efficiency
of parking behaviour. A percentage or number of available parking
spaces are shown for selected parking lots. None of the
applications give the driver a choice in selecting a particular
parking space. Most of the applications use underground wireless
sensors such as magnetometers to get real-time parking occupancy
information. Setup and maintenance cost of wireless sensors will
be high and it is mandatory to replace all sensors again when the
battery life is depleted. Since, a sensor needs to be placed in all the
parking spaces, operational and maintenance costs of such sensors
would be high. Crowdsourcing application is suited for open/closed
parking lots and the expenditure is considered very minimal as no
hardware installations or maintenance is required. However, the
users need to update occupancy details of parking spaces every
time they park the vehicle and the accuracy of the information will
be dependent on the user updating the occupancy details and is
prone to human errors. Applications such as Parkopedia [ 47] and
EasyPark Group [ 48] use historical data for predicting parking
occupancy information. Algorithms like fuzzy logic, time series are
used to predict parking occupancy information based on historical
or sample data. These applications are operational in more number
of cities and countries compared to other applications. All these
applications provide an overview of parking occupancy which
facilitates in decision making.
4 Discussion
The review of existing smart parking applications shows that most
of these applications use sensors for parking occupancy detection
in closed parking lots which would require a considerable amount
of expenditure for installation and maintenance activities.
AppyParking [ 49] application mentioned in Table 3 provides the
location of open parking lots. However, parking occupancy
information of open parking lot is not provided. Few applications
such as EasyPark Group and Parkopedia use predictive analytics or
crowdsourcing which can also be used on open parking lots. The
applications which used predictive analytics were operational in
more number of cities and countries than the applications which
used sensors for parking occupancy detection. The difference
might be due to less expenditure in using predictive analytics than
deploying sensors in all parking spaces. However, real-time
occupancy information of parking spaces cannot be acquired using
predictive analytics and accuracy of parking occupancy
information by crowdsourcing is not reliable. None of the
applications provide real-time parking occupancy information of
open parking lots. Lack of economic returns can be one of the
reasons for not providing real-time occupancy information of open
parking lots. Since there would not be any immediate economic
gains with the use of smart parking tools at open parking lots, it
would be well suited to use a sensor or technology with minimal
expenditure to make it financially viable. A smart parking
application would assist the driver as a decision support system and
can also help in reducing congestion. However, using a smart
parking application is optional and few drivers might not be
convenient in using an application for parking occupancy.
Complete benefits in terms of parking occupancy, land usage,
congestion and pollution are only possible if every driver is using
the application which is not practically possible.
According to previous literatures, several smart parking sensors
and technologies were tested and reviewed. However, sensors or
technologies were largely used for closed parking lots which
support reservation. None of the technologies were used to
improve the efficiency of parking in open parking lots. Ultrasonic
and infrared sensors are sensitive to environmental conditions
which might lead to inaccurate parking occupancy information.
Sensors such as magnetometers and microwave radar are not
sensitive to environmental conditions but are expensive to install
and maintain at open parking lots. Even if the prices of sensors
come down there would still be expenditure involved with
installation and maintenance activities which would make it
expensive to use sensors in open parking lots. Therefore, sensors
are not ideal for open parking lots as expenditure should be
minimal. Technologies such as V ANET are also expensive and can
be ruled out for open parking lots. However, V ANET can be
suitable in the future when all the vehicles are connected using on-
board and road side units.
The parking occupancy detection using machine vision will
vary between closed and open parking lots as there can be varying
light conditions in an open outdoor parking lot. As mentioned
earlier, challenges faced by low lighting and shadow conditions can
be addressed. Therefore, machine vision using visual camera is one
of the feasible smart parking technology for acquiring real-time
parking occupancy information in open parking lots. Machine
vision can be associated with convolutional neural networks and
deep learning for efficient image classification. In the literature,
neural networks are used mostly for LPR and there are limited
studies which use convolutional neural networks for parking
Table 3 Smart parking applications and their use of
technologies and sensors
Smart parking
application
Country Sensors/technology
used
Park.ME Austria, Germany underground sensors
SmartParking New Zealand underground sensors,
RFID
ParkMe Japan, USA, UK,
Germany, Brazil
underground sensors
ParkAssist USA M4 Smart sensors, LPR
SpotHero USA underground sensors
EasyPark Canada underground sensors
PaybyPhone France underground sensors
ParkMobile USA underground sensors
AppyParking UK magnetometer
EasyPark Group Sweden, Denmark
and so on
transactional data and
crowdsourcing
Parker USA underground sensors,
machine vision
ParkiFi USA magnetometer
Best Parking USA underground sensors
Parkopedia USA, Germany,
Sweden and so on
predictive analytics,
underground sensors
SFPark USA underground sensors
Open Spot USA crowdsourcing
 
IET Intell. Transp. Syst., 2018, Vol. 12 Iss. 8, pp. 735-741
© The Institution of Engineering and Technology 2018
739
 17519578, 2018, 8, Downloaded from https://ietresearch.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1049/iet-its.2017.0406, Wiley Online Library on [21/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


===== PAGE 6 =====

occupancy detection. However, image classification accuracy is
high while using convolutional neural networks.
In deep learning, large datasets such as Alexnet [ 50] are already
available and additional data would facilitate in further improving
image classification. Different technologies or image classification
algorithms can be tested using PKLot which is publicly available
outdoor parking lot images dataset [ 34, 36]. However, this dataset
is not suitable if an infrared or thermal camera is used for data
collection. Convolutional neural networks and deep learning are
contemporary technologies which can be used in parking
occupancy detection of open parking lots. As expenditure plays an
important role in the choice of technology, it is found that machine
vision, multi-agent systems, along with convolutional neural
network are suitable to provide parking occupancy information.
Data collected using the visual camera would be processed using
image classification algorithms or convolutional neural network to
generate parking occupancy information. This information can be
displayed using smart parking applications along with navigational
directions. Smart parking applications serve as decision support
systems for the user as it helps the user to find a suitable parking
space which is true in a closed parking lot. However, in an open
parking lot, it might not be the case as a parking space selected by
the user can be occupied by another vehicle. Therefore, in an open
parking lot, a parking space should be updated in real time based
on the availability and navigational directions should be provided
to the updated parking space.
Along with real-time parking occupancy information, a short-
term prediction of occupancy can be acquired using algorithms like
fuzzy logic and time series. Since, reservation is not possible in an
open parking lot, a short-term prediction would facilitate the driver
in the decision-making process of choosing a parking lot. The
prediction of parking space availability can also be made based on
the location of the driver and its distance to the desired parking lot
or destination. An optimal route can be calculated from the location
to destination based on the distance of the route using which
estimated arrival time can be acquired. Therefore, parking space
occupancy prediction based on estimated arrival time can be shown
to the driver. In this way, smart parking applications can serve as
efficient decision support systems. Due to various types of parking
lots, such as outdoor, multi-storey, basement or indoor, a
combination of smart parking technologies and sensors can be used
to improve the efficiency of parking behaviour with minimal
expenditure.
Algorithms such as logistic regression, radial basis function,
support vector machines, decision tree, random forest, Viola and
Jones object detectors and so on can be used for pattern recognition
and image classification. Support vector machines can be used to
enhance feature extraction which would improve image
classification. In methods such as convolutional neural networks,
sample test and train images should be collected to train the
network. The quality of classification would mostly depend on the
trained sample images. The sample images consist of different
vehicles and parking spaces at different environmental and light
conditions. These images can be used to train convolutional neural
network for efficient image classification. Usage of the visual
camera for gathering parking occupancy information would also
depend on a country's privacy protection laws. It can be used in
public places with less restrictions in countries such as the UK and
the USA. However, in countries such as Sweden, usage of
surveillance camera is restricted unless it is used for preventing or
investigating crimes [ 51]. A surveillance camera can be used
without any restrictions if it is used in a private place without the
involvement of public. In Sweden, the surveillance camera is
restricted to use in an open parking based on privacy protection
laws. Therefore, usage of surveillance camera's or similar
technology might be subjected to individual countries regulations.
In order to comply with the regulations, it is suggested to use a
thermal camera as public cannot be recognised using it. Thermal
cameras are expensive compared to a colour cameras. Since, either
a colour- or thermal-based cameras can be used to cover a large
number of parking spaces, the expenditure involved in using a
thermal camera might not be high compared to the usage of
underground sensors. Future research can be made in using a
thermal camera for parking occupancy detection.
Vehicle system technologies are moving towards automation
and there are proven technologies such as park assist that are
already available with new generation vehicles. Park assist feature
will only help to park the vehicle without human intervention but it
does not eradicate congestion. Such features can be improved if the
vehicle is provided with real-time parking occupancy information.
Therefore, parking occupancy information of an open parking lot
can be gathered using a financially viable method which can be
connected to automated driving vehicles for efficient parking. The
usage of smart parking technology or sensor for parking occupancy
information can be changed based on the kind of parking lot. If a
parking lot is indoor and has less number of parking spaces,
sensors such as magnetometers can also be used to collect parking
occupancy information. If a parking lot is outdoor, the visual
camera can be used at an elevated position to cover the entire
parking lot. When a parking space is updated the navigational
directions to enter the parking lot might also be updated and this
might be a challenge to address when the user is already following
navigational directions to a selected parking space. Future research
can also be made to address this challenge.
5 Conclusion
This paper identifies a research gap in utilising smart parking
sensors, technologies and applications for open parking lots. All
the existing smart parking technologies and applications are not
suitable for open parking lots due to varying environmental
conditions and high expenditure. As there are no immediate
economic gains from providing smart parking services in an open
parking lot, expenditure plays an important role in the choice of
smart parking technologies. Parking guidance system which is one
of the existing smart parking technology can be used to get the
count of available parking spaces in open parking lots. Machine
vision is another technology which uses the visual camera to
acquire real-time parking occupancy information on open parking
lots due to its minimal expenditure. The usage of the visual camera
is dependent on regulations supported by the country which needs
to be considered prior. However, there is no single ideal technology
suitable for parking occupancy detection. Based on the type of
parking lot and size, a different combination of smart parking
technologies and sensors can be used for efficient and financially
viable parking occupancy detection. In order to further improve
parking efficiency, navigational directions should be provided to a
vacant parking space. Therefore, in order to address this challenge
further research in the use of deep learning and multi-agent
systems would help to provide real-time parking occupancy
information along with navigational directions to available parking
space in an open parking lot.
6 References
[1] Chinrungrueng, J., Sunantachaikul, U., Triamlumlerd, S.: ‘Smart parking: an
application of optical wireless sensor network’, Int. Symp. on the applications
and internet workshop, Japan, Hiroshima, IEEE, 2007
[2] Polak, J., Vythoulkas, P.: ‘An assessment of the state-of-the-art in the
modelling of parking behaviour’, Report to Transport Research laboratory,
Issue 753, 1993
[3] Boltze, M., Puzicha, J.: ‘Effectiveness of the parking guidance system in
Frankfurt am main’, Parking Trend Int., 1995, pp. 27–30
[4] White, P.: ‘No Vacancy: Park Slopes Parking Problem And How to Fix It, in
Internet’: http://www.transalt.org/newsroom/releases/126 [7 January 2016].
2007
[5] Gallivan, S.: ‘IBM global parking survey: Drivers share worldwide parking
woes technical report’. Technical report, IBM, 2011
[6] Shoup, D.C.: ‘Cruising for parking’, Transp. Policy, 2006, 13, (6), pp. 479–
486
[7] Polycarpou, E., Lambrinos, L., Protopapadakis, E.: ‘Smart parking solutions
for urban areas’. 2013 IEEE 14th Int. Symp. and Workshops on a World of
Wireless, Mobile and Multimedia Networks (WoWMoM), Madrid, Spain,
2013
[8] Geroliminis, N., Daganzo, C.F.: ‘Existence of urban-scale macroscopic
fundamental diagrams: some experimental findings’, Transp. Res. B,
Methodol., 2008, 42, (9), pp. 759–770
[9] Geroliminis, N., Sun, J.: ‘Properties of a well-defined macroscopic
fundamental diagram for urban traffic’, Transp. Res. B, Methodol. , 2011, 45,
(3), pp. 605–617
740 IET Intell. Transp. Syst., 2018, Vol. 12 Iss. 8, pp. 735-741
© The Institution of Engineering and Technology 2018
 17519578, 2018, 8, Downloaded from https://ietresearch.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1049/iet-its.2017.0406, Wiley Online Library on [21/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


===== PAGE 7 =====

[10] Shoup, D.C.: ‘ The high cost of free parking ’, vol. 206 (Planners Press,
Chicago, 2005)
[11] Statista: ‘Average age of light vehicles in the U.S. from 2003 to 2016 (in
years)’, 2017, https://www.statista.com/statistics/261881/average-age-of-
light-vehicles-in-the-united-states/, accessed 17 November 2017
[12] European Automobile Manufactures Association: ‘Average vehicle age’,
2017, http://www.acea.be/statistics/tag/category/average-vehicle-age,
accessed 17 November 2017
[13] Thierer, A., Hagemann, R.: ‘Removing roadblocks to intelligent vehicles and
driverless cars’, 2014
[14] Harding, J., Powell, G., Yoon, R., et al.: ‘Vehicle-to-vehicle communications:
readiness of V2V technology for application’. 2014
[15] Guler, S.I., Menendez, M., Meier, L.: ‘Using connected vehicle technology to
improve the efficiency of intersections’, Transp. Res. C, Emerg. Technol. ,
2014, 46, pp. 121–131
[16] Yang, Z., Liu, H., Wang, X.: ‘The research on the key technologies for
improving efficiency of parking guidance system’. Intelligent Transportation
Systems, Proc. 2003 IEEE, Shanghai, China, 2003
[17] Kotb, A.O., Shen, Y .C., Zhu, X. , et al. : ‘Iparker—A new smart car-parking
system based on dynamic resource allocation and pricing’, IEEE Trans. Intell.
Transp. Syst., 2016, 17, (9), pp. 2637–2647
[18] Revathi, G., Dhulipala, V .S.: ‘Smart parking systems and sensors: A survey’.
2012 Int. Conf. on IEEE Computing, Communication and Applications
(ICCCA), Dindigul, Tamilnadu, India, 2012
[19] Mimbela, L.E.Y ., Klein, L.A.: ‘Summary of vehicle detection and surveillance
technologies used in intelligent transportation systems’. 2000
[20] Hassoune, K., Dachry, W., Moutaouakkil, F. , et al.: ‘Smart parking systems: A
survey’. 11th Int. Conf. on IEEE Intelligent Systems: Theories and
Applications (SITA), 2016
[21] Fraifer, M., Fernström, M.: ‘Investigation of smart parking systems and their
technologies’. Thirty Seventh Int. Conf. on Information Systems. IoT Smart
City Challenges Applications (ISCA 2016), Dublin, Ireland, 2016
[22] Mahmud, S., Khan, G.M., Rahman, M. , et al. : ‘A survey of intelligent car
parking system’, J. Applied Res. Technol., 2013, 11, (5), pp. 714–726
[23] Enríquez, F., Soria, L.M., Álvarez-García, J.A., et al.: ‘Existing approaches to
smart parking: An overview’. Int. Conf. on Smart Cities, Malaga, Spain, 2017
[24] Idris, M., Leng, Y .Y ., Tamil, E.M., et al.: ‘Саг park system: a review of smart
parking system and its technology’, Inf. Technol. J., 2009, 8, (2), pp. 101–113
[25] Shaheen, S.: ‘ Smart parking management field test: a bay area rapid transit
(bart) district parking demonstration ’ (Institute of Transportation Studies,
Davis, CA, USA, 2005)
[26] Mouskos, K., Boile, M., Parker, N.A.: ‘ Technical solutions to overcrowded
park and ride facilities ’ (New Jersey Department of Transportation, New
Jersey, NY , USA, 2007)
[27] Kianpisheh, A., Mustaffa, N., Limtrairut, P. , et al. : ‘Smart parking system
(SPS) architecture using ultrasonic detector’, Int. J. Softw. Eng. Appl. , 2012,
6, (3), pp. 51–58
[28] Idris, M., Tamil, E.M., Noor, N.M. , et al.: ‘Parking guidance system utilizing
wireless sensor network and ultrasonic sensor’, Inf. Technol. J., 2009, 8, (2),
pp. 138–146
[29] Mathur, S., Jin, T., Kasturirangan, N. , et al. : ‘Parknet: drive-by sensing of
road-side parking statistics’. Proc. of the 8th Int. Conf. on Mobile Systems,
Applications, and Services, ACM, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2010
[30] Waterson, B., Hounsell, N., Chatterjee, K.: ‘Quantifying the potential savings
in travel time resulting from parking guidance systems-a simulation case
study’, J. Oper. Res. Soc., 2001, 52, (10), pp. 1067–1077
[31] Rahman, M.S., Park, Y ., Kim, K.-D.: ‘Relative location estimation of vehicles
in parking management system’. 11th Int. Conf. on IEEE Advanced
Communication Technology, ICACT 2009, Phoenix Park, South Korea, 2009
[32] Bao, X., Zhan, Y ., Xu, C. , et al. : ‘A novel dual microwave Doppler radar
based vehicle detection sensor for parking lot occupancy detection’, IEICE
Electron. Express, 2017, 14, (1), pp. 1–12
[33] Pullola, S., Atrey, P.K., El Saddik, A.: ‘Towards an intelligent GPS-based
vehicle navigation system for finding street parking lots’. IEEE Int. Conf. on
Signal Processing and Communications, ICSPC 2007, Dubai, United Arab
Emirates, 2007
[34] De Almeida, P.R., Oliveira, L.S., Britto, JrA.S. , et al. : ‘PKLot–A robust
dataset for parking lot classification’, Expert Syst. Appl. , 2015, 42, (11), pp.
4937–4949
[35] Viola, P., Jones, M.: ‘Rapid object detection using a boosted cascade of
simple features’. Proc. of the 2001 IEEE Computer Society Conf. on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2001, Kauai, HI, USA,
2001
[36] Ahrnbom, M., Astrom, K., Nilsson, M.: ‘Fast classification of empty and
occupied parking spaces using integral channel features’. Proc. of the IEEE
Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops, Las Vegas,
NV , USA, 2016
[37] Ichihashi, H., Notsu, A., Honda, K. , et al.: ‘Vacant parking space detector for
outdoor parking lot by using surveillance camera and FCM classifier’. . IEEE
Int. Conf. on Fuzzy Systems, FUZZ-IEEE 2009, Jeju Island, South Korea,
2009
[38] Huang, C.-C., Tai, Y .-S., Wang, S.-J.: ‘Vacant parking space detection based
on plane-based Bayesian hierarchical framework’, IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst.
Video Technol., 2013, 23, (9), pp. 1–13
[39] Lu, R., Lin, X., Zhu, H. , et al.: ‘An intelligent secure and privacy-preserving
parking scheme through vehicular communications’, IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol., 2010, 59, (6), pp. 2772–2785
[40] Bilal, M., Persson, C., Ramparany, F. , et al. : ‘Multi-agent based governance
model for machine-to-machine networks in a smart parking management
system’. IEEE Int. Conf. on Communications, Ottawa, 2012
[41] Rahman, C.A., Badawy, W., Radmanesh, A.: ‘A real time vehicle's license
plate recognition system’. Proc. IEEE Conf. on Advanced Video and Signal
Based Surveillance, Miami, FL, USA, 2003
[42] Villegas, O.O.V ., et al. : ‘License plate recognition using a novel fuzzy
multilayer neural network’, Int. J. Comput., 2009, 3, (1), pp. 31–40
[43] Jermsurawong, J., Ahsan, M.U., Haidar, A.: ‘Car parking vacancy detection
and Its application in 24-hour statistical analysis’. 10th Int. Conf. on Frontiers
of Information Technology, Islamabad, Pakistan, 2012
[44] Amato, G., Carrara, F., Falchi, F. , et al. : ‘Deep learning for decentralized
parking lot occupancy detection’, Expert Syst. Appl., 2017, 72, pp. 327–334
[45] Bojarski, M., Del Testa, D., Dworakowski, D., et al.: ‘End to end learning for
self-driving cars’. arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.07316, 2016
[46] Chen, Z., Xia, J.C., Irawan, B.: ‘Development of fuzzy logic forecast models
for location-based parking finding services’, Math. Probl. Eng. , 2013, 2013,
pp. 1–6
[47] ‘Parkopedia - Parking App’, https://en.parkopedia.se/, accessed 05 March
2017
[48] ‘EasyPark Group - Parking App’, https://easyparkgroup.com/, accessed 05
March 2017
[49] ‘AppyParking - Parking App’, http://www.appyparking.com/, accessed 05
March 2017
[50] ‘Alexnet - Convolutional neural networks’, https://se.mathworks.com/help/
nnet/ref/alexnet.html, accessed 05 March 2017
[51] Alarik, O.: ‘Kameraövervakningslagen. 2018, https://
www.datainspektionen.se/lagar-och-regler/kameraovervakningslagen/,
accessed 25 February 2018
IET Intell. Transp. Syst., 2018, Vol. 12 Iss. 8, pp. 735-741
© The Institution of Engineering and Technology 2018
741
 17519578, 2018, 8, Downloaded from https://ietresearch.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1049/iet-its.2017.0406, Wiley Online Library on [21/03/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
