

===== PAGE 1 =====

2878 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTA TION SYSTEMS, VOL. 16, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2015
Counting and Classiﬁcation of Highway V ehicles
by Regression Analysis
Mingpei Liang, Xinyu Huang, Chung-Hao Chen, Xin Chen, and Alade Tokuta
Abstract—In this paper, we describe a novel algorithm that
counts and classiﬁes highway vehicles based on regression analy-
sis. This algorithm requires no explicit segmentation or tracking
of individual vehicles, which is usually an important part of
many existing algorithms. Therefore, this algorithm is particularly
useful when there are severe occlusions or vehicle resolution is
low, in which extracted features are highly unreliable. There are
mainly two contributions in our proposed algorithm. First, a
warping method is developed to detect the foreground segments
that contain unclassiﬁed vehicles. The common used modeling
and tracking (e.g., Kalman ﬁltering) of individual vehicles are
not required. In order to reduce vehicle distortion caused by the
foreshortening effect, a nonuniform mesh grid and a projective
transformation are estimated and applied during the warping
process. Second, we extract a set of low-level features for each
foreground segment and develop a cascaded regression approach
to count and classify vehicles directly, which has not been used
in the area of intelligent transportation systems. Three different
regressors are designed and evaluated. Experiments show that our
regression-based algorithm is accurate and robust for poor quality
videos, from which many existing algorithms could fail to extract
reliable features.
Index Terms —Highway vehicle, image warping, cascaded
regression.
I. I NTRODUCTION
V
IDEO cameras could be used to record the trafﬁc in-
formation constantly or continuously. We are thus able
to analyze the trafﬁc videos in real time and discover any
information of interest. One fundamental task is to count the
vehicles passing by in a given time period and classify the
vehicles into different categories at the same time. The counting
and classiﬁcation results could be useful in many different
applications. For example, they could be used to measure trafﬁc
density, trafﬁc ﬂow, and even emissions in terms of pollutants
and greenhouse gases.
Counting and classiﬁcation also could be done by other
sensors such as radar, infrared, and inductive loop detectors.
Although some sensors could be more accurate, they could also
Manuscript received May 25, 2014; revised August 23, 2014, December 7,
2014, and March 23, 2015; accepted April 17, 2015. Date of publication May 1,
2015; date of current version September 25, 2015. The Associate Editor for this
paper was H. Huang.
M. Liang, X. Huang, and A. Tokuta are with the Department of Mathematics
and Computer Science, North Carolina Central University, Durham, NC 27707
USA (e-mail: mliang@nccu.edu; xinyu. huang@nccu.edu; atokuta@nccu.edu).
C.-H. Chen is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Old Dominion University, Norfolk, V A 23529 USA (e-mail: cxchen@odu.edu).
X. Chen is with HERE, Chicago, IL 60606 USA (e-mail: xin.5.chen@
here.com).
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TITS.2015.2424917
be intrusive and need a higher maintenance cost. For example,
we may need to embed weighing sensors in road to measure
vehicle weight and classify vehi cle size. Comparing with other
sensors, vision-based systems could be non-intrusive and could
obtain much richer trafﬁc information. However, current vision-
based systems could be less accurate and more sensitive to
operating conditions (e.g., weather). These problems make
vision-based systems challenging and important research topics
in the area of intelligent transportation systems.
A typical vision-based trafﬁc analysis system could consist
of many components such as foreground segmentation, shadow
removal, feature extraction, and tracking [1]. In order to count
and classify vehicles, there is often a module to detect and
separate individual vehicles for each foreground segment. This
module could be conducted after feature extraction or tracking.
For example, if feature points could be extracted robustly across
multiple image frames, it is possible to ﬁt explicit 2D/3-D
vehicle models [2], [3]. This kind of algorithms usually requires
at least moderate-resolution images without severe occlusions
and motion blur. In this paper, we would like to process low-
quality videos by skipping this m odule. In our collected videos,
multiple vehicles could be occluded and thus form a large fore-
ground segment. Separation or inference of individual vehicles
would be a difﬁcult task in this case. Moreover, a 2-D vehicle
shape could be strongly distorted caused by the foreshortening
effect, which means the weak perspective projection used in the
traditional algorithms is not a good approximation. As the video
frame rate could be as low as one frame per second, the vehicle
size could be reduced to less than 10 × 10 pixels for the next
image frame. Therefore, it would also be difﬁcult to detect and
track robust feature points or edges. Fig. 1 shows several image
frames in our collected videos.
There are mainly two contributions of the proposed algo-
rithm. First, we develop a warping method to detect image
foreground segments that contain unclassiﬁed vehicles. In order
to reduce vehicle distortion between two consecutive image
frames, we estimate a non-uniform mesh grid and a projective
transformation. By using this warping method, we do not need
the common used tracking or modeling of individual vehicles.
We either do not need to assume the weak perspective pro-
jection that has been used in some existing algorithms (e.g.,
[2], [4]). In fact, the warping method could be considered as
an approximation of the perspective projection when vehicle
features are not reliable. Furthermore, the warping method
based on the non-uniform mesh grid is designed for both curved
(as shown in Figs. 1(c) and 7) and straight highway sections.
To our knowledge, there are no other similar algorithms for
1524-9050 © 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution
requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

===== PAGE 2 =====

LIANG et al.: COUNTING AND CLASSIFICA TION OF HIGHW A Y VEHICLES BY REGRESSION ANAL YSIS 2879
Fig. 1. Examples of image frames. (a) and (b) show the severe occlusions. (c) and (d) are two consecutive image frames showing strong shape distortion c aused
by the foreshortening effect. Feature points or edges a re often unreliable in these low resolution images.
the detection of unclassiﬁed vehicles. Secondly, we propose
a cascaded regression approach to count and classify vehicles
directly. A set of low-level features are extracted and form
an input vector for the regression. Three different regressors
that include Gaussian process regression, standard Poisson
regression, and Bayesian Poisson regression are designed and
evaluated.
Notice that other components of a typical trafﬁc analysis
system, such as shadow removal and foreground segmentation,
are not the focus of this paper. These components could be
useful for adverse weather conditions. Therefore, the counting
and classiﬁcation performance could be further improved when
advanced algorithms for these components are added to the
system. Our paper is organized as follows. Section II provides
a review of related work. Our algorithm is described in details
in Section III. Section IV shows the experimental results and
Section V gives a conclusion.
II. R
ELA TED WORK
First, we provide a review of different feature extraction
methods for trafﬁc analysis. In [5], a set of Scale Invariant Fea-
ture Transform (SIFT) features [6] are extracted and matched
in the follow-up image frames in order to improve tracking
performance. The SIFT features are also detected, tracked,
clustered in the foreground blobs in [7]. Horizontal and vertical
line features are extracted in [8] to build a 3-D vehicle model
assuming the vehicle is not occluded. Similarly, by predicting
and matching image intensity edges, Leotta et al. [9] ﬁt a
generic 3-D vehicle model to multiple still images. Simultane-
ous tracking can also be done during the shape estimation in a
video. Ma et al. [10] proposed a vehicle classiﬁcation algorithm
that uses the feature based on edge points and modiﬁed SIFT
descriptors. Two classiﬁcation tasks, cars versus minivans and
sedans versus taxies, are tested with good performance. In
[11], a 3-D extended Histograms of Oriented Gradients (HOG)
feature for detection and classiﬁcation of individual vehicles
and pedestrians is proposed by combining 3-D interest points
and HOG. 3-D vehicle models are pre-reconstructed by the
methods in [12].
Region-based features are often used for trafﬁc analysis.
Gupte et al. [13] track regions in image frames by matching,
splitting, and merging of these regions. The foreshortening
effects between two consecutive image frames are not consid-
ered. In [14], assuming individual vehicles have been separated
after lane and shadow detection, Hsieh et al. further extracted
region size and vehicle “linearity” to classify vehicles into four
categories (e.g., car, minivan, truck, and van truck). In [15],
image regions are extracted according to high edge density
areas. Shadows, symmetry measurement, and Harris corners are
then used in the hypothesis classiﬁcation. In [2], image regions
of interest are extracted based on motion detection, then a 3-D
model is ﬁtted to the image region using a point-to-line segment
distance metric.
Occlusion is a major challenging problem in the vehicle
segmentation. Many methods have been proposed to deal with
this problem. Features mentioned above could be considered as
a set of “parts” that are tracked and grouped together [16], [17].
When the 2-D/3-D vehicle model could be ﬁtted into image
frames, it is also relatively easy to detect occlusions [2], [18].
In [19], a spatiotemporal Markov random ﬁeld is proposed to
detect occluded vehicles at intersections. In [20], a “cutting
region” between two occluded vehicles is extracted based on
the motion ﬁeld of consecutive image frames. Similarly, a
“cutting line” is estimated in [21] to separate two occluded
vehicles based on the analysis of convex shape.
Image warping is not considered as a step or module to
detect and track vehicles in [1]. There are some researches using
image warping as a pre-processing step to generate a horizontal
or vertical road segment to facilitate the detection and tracking
(e.g., [7], [22]). Four reference points are selected to estimate a
projective transformation in [7]. This transformation is applied
so that all motion vectors are approximately parallel to each
other. The similar idea is applied in [22] so that lanes could
be detected easily. However, image warping itself has not been
applied directly to detect unclassiﬁed vehicles. Moreover, only
four reference points used in these algorithms are often not
enough to model non-straight road segments. In our algorithm,
we estimate a nonlinear mesh grid to model road segments more
accurately.
The features used in many existing algorithms could be ro-
bust when image quality is ideal. However, these features based
on point, line, and image region could be highly unreliable with
a low image quality. Therefore, it could not be a good choice to
use them for segmentation and tracking of individual vehicles
and even 3-D reconstruction. In this paper, we use a set of low-
level features that could be considered as weak classiﬁers and
apply regression to count and classify vehicles directly.
Regression analysis has been applied to count people in
[23], which is similar to our proposed algorithm. There are
mainly two differences between two algorithms. First, the
detection of unclassiﬁed vehicles is quite different from the

===== PAGE 3 =====

2880 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTA TION SYSTEMS, VOL. 16, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2015
Fig. 2. (a) Red points sampled along trafﬁc trajectory. (b) Fitted spline using vertical positions that are the y coordinates of the sampled points (i.e., horizontal
axis is the number of the sampled points, and vertical axis is the corresponding y coordinate). (c) Fitted spline using y coordinates of sampled points (i.e., the
vertical axis in (b)) and horizontal distances between consecutive sample points. (d) Generated dense mesh grid.
crowd segmentation described in [23]. The crowd segmentation
is done by a mixture of dynamic textures. In the mixture
model, the observed variable is the sampled video frames,
and the hidden variable encodes the dynamics. Another hid-
den variable is a mixture component that is used to handle
inhomogeneous videos. In the ﬁrst part of our algorithm, we
apply a nonlinear warping algorithm on foreground segments
in the previous frame. A projective transformation is applied
to reduce perspective distortion. Weighted normalized cross
correlation (WNCC) is used to compare transformed patches
with the corresponding patches in the current frame. Secondly,
the regression frameworks of two algorithms are different.
In our algorithm, we build a three-level cascaded regression
framework as we have three different vehicle classes. More
importantly, to our knowledge, regression analysis has not been
applied before for counting and classifying highway vehicles.
III. A
LGORITHM
Our algorithm mainly consists of four steps. The ﬁrst step
is the background estimation and foreground segmentation.
Background estimation is a necessary pre-processing step for
most vision-based systems. Background could be estimated by
a simple averaging [17], [24]. The averaging method has little
computational cost, however, it could not be robust to different
operating conditions. To improve robustness, the background
pixel could also be modeled as a single Gaussian, a mix-
ture of Gaussians, and on [25]–[28]. Recently, Unzueta et al.
proposed an adaptive multi-cue s egmentation strategy to de-
tect foreground pixels [29]. As our major contribution is the
novel algorithm for counting and classiﬁcation, we apply the
averaging method to estimate background and use thresholds
and morphological operations (e.g., erode and dilate) to extract
the foreground segments. A region of interest is also deﬁned
and the foreground segments outside the region of interest are
removed. The rest steps are described in Section III-A, III-B,
and III-C, respectively.
A. Detection of Unclassiﬁed V ehicles
It would be difﬁcult to detect and track robust features since
vehicle size could be reduced to as small as 10 × 10. Therefore,
it is necessary to consider a much larger image region that
could contain more than one vehicle. Since the time between
two consecutive image frames is around 1 second, it is safe
to assume the relative 3-D distances among vehicles remain
almost unchanged or have small changes. However, due to the
foreshortening effect, their 2-D projections could be distorted
signiﬁcantly. Hence, the weak pers pective projection assumed
in [2], [4] is not a good approximation.
We ﬁrst manually sample a small set of points on the dashed
lane markers along the road direction. The vertical positions
and horizontal distances between two consecutive points are
computed. Fig. 2(a) shows the sampled points (i.e., the red
points) on the background imag e, which partition the highway
road into a set of regions based on their y coordinates. Notice
that it is easy to automate this sampling step when the trafﬁc
trajectory is known. The trajectory can be estimated robustly
in [30], [31]. Two sets of values are used to ﬁt two smoothing
splines. The spline ﬁtted by vertical positions (i.e., Fig. 2(b))
is a modeling of the foreshortening effect along the road
direction. The horizontal axis is the same as the number of
sampled points, and the vertical axis is the corresponding y
coordinates. As the horizontal direction is roughly parallel to
the image plane, the spline ﬁtted by the horizontal distances
(i.e., Fig. 2(c)) is a modeling of scaling factors along x-axis.
The horizontal axis of this ﬁgure is same as the vertical axis
in the Fig. 2(b), and the vertical axis is the horizontal distance
between two consecutive sample points, which is proportional
to the scaling factor. We adopt smoothing splines for ﬁtting as
the road direction may not be straight. These two splines are
used to generate a dense nonuniform mesh grid.
Our warping method used to detect unclassiﬁed vehicles is
based on the mesh grid. For simplicity, let us assume the trafﬁc
ﬂow is from bottom to top. It is straightforward to extend
the warping method to other different trafﬁc ﬂows. First, we
check if there are any foreground segments in the bottom region
of the previous image frame. This is done by comparing the
current image frame with the background image. If the area of
foreground segments is larger than the minimum area of a small
size vehicle (computed from the training set), then we compute
a bounding box that includes these foreground segments. The
mesh vertices in the bounding box are the original mesh grid.
Secondly, we conduct a complete search from the bottom region
to the top region. When we decrease the y coordinate, we can
ﬁnd a new set of vertices that is a shift of the original mesh grid
along the highway road. This new set of vertices is the target
mesh grid. Warping method we used here is the Thin-Plane

===== PAGE 4 =====

LIANG et al.: COUNTING AND CLASSIFICA TION OF HIGHW A Y VEHICLES BY REGRESSION ANAL YSIS 2881
Fig. 3. Selection of four points for the projective transformation.
spline warping in [32]. Texture mapping could also be used to
speed up the warping process. Image patch of the foreground
mask is also warped. The warped intensity image is compared
with the same image patch in the current image frame based on
the WNCC,
γ=
∑
i wi(Ip(i)−¯Ip)·(Ic(i)−¯Ic)
√
∑
i wi(Ip(i)−¯Ip)2 ·
√
∑
i wi(Ic(i)−¯Ic)2 (1)
where Ip(i) and Ic(i) are corresponding pixel values in previ-
ous and current image frames, ¯Ip and ¯Ic are the weighted mean
values of pixels in previous and current image frames, and wi
is the pixel weight in the previous image frame. The wi is set
to 1 if it is in the foreground mask and 0 otherwise. The highest
matching score is selected and a convex hull is generated based
on the foreground segments in the warped mask. The convex
hull gives us the image region that has been classiﬁed. The
foreground segments below the convex hull in the current image
frame contain the unclassiﬁed vehicles. It is interesting to note
that the search results could also be used to estimate the trafﬁc
density. If the moving distance along the highway direction is
small, it is likely to have a heavy trafﬁc.
Warping is deﬁned by the mesh vertices on the road surface.
If the vehicle height is large (e.g., a truck), vehicle shape could
still be distorted or tilted after warping. Therefore, we apply
another projective transformation to the foreground segment
after warping in order to further reduce the distortion. In order
to deﬁne a projective transformation, we need to deﬁne four
pairs of points. As shown in Fig. 3, as the trafﬁc ﬂow is from
bottom to top, the right and bottom part of the foreground
segments are often close to the road surface. Thus, we sample
three points, bottom-right p
1, bottom-left p2, and a rightmost
point p3 at the mean of y coordinates. These three points are
the same after the projective transformation.
The fourth points p4 and p′
4 are selected based on the
assumption that vertical lines on the vehicle are often parallel
with the image plane of camera. Thus, the vertical lines are still
vertical in the image after the perspective projection. We ﬁrst
select a vertical line with length l in the original mesh grid.
l would be transformed to l
′ that is often not vertical after the
warping process we described above. Since the warping process
is essentially an interpolation of neighboring pixels, we could
compute the coordinate ofp4 by the interpolation of four nearby
mesh vertices (i.e., the red points in Fig. 3. As the length of the
vertical line is s·l, p′
4 is also computed. Here, s is the scaling
factor that is derived from the spline in Fig. 2(c). Note that
this 2-D projective transformation only approximately models
the distortions of large vehicles caused by the perspective
projection. An exact solution would require camera calibration
or 3-D reconstruction. However, this could be time-consuming
and needs reliable measuremen ts and feature extraction.
Fig. 4 is an example that illustrates the processes such as
warping, projective transformation, weighted normalized cor-
relation, and detection of current unclassiﬁed vehicles.
B. Feature Extraction
As mentioned, it could be difﬁcult to detect and track reliable
features in low quality image frames. Therefore, we only use a
set of low level features that could present weak linear relations
to the vehicle count. These features include 1) segment area;
2) segment length along the road direction; 3) segment width;
4) segment perimeter associated with the number of pixels on
the segment boundary; 5) horizontal edge length within the
segment (i.e., segment boundary is not included); 6) texture
coarseness.
These features are similar to the features used in [23] with
two main differences. First, they are normalized (e.g., re-scaled)
based on the smoothing spline estimated in Fig. 2(c). A refer-
ence line with y coordinate close to the image bottom is chosen
for the normalization. Secondly, as trafﬁc trajectory is known or
has been estimated, segment length and width are not sensitive
to the road direction. Thus, they are computed by projection
onto the road direction and the direction perpendicular to the
road direction. Longer length and width often indicate more
vehicles or larger vehicles in the segment. Horizontal edge
length within a segment is a feature that could distinguish a
large vehicle and multiple small vehicles that may have the
similar area and segment length. Texture coarseness consists
of measurements of homogeneity, energy, and entropy along
four orientations [23], [33]. Similar to horizontal edge length,
texture coarseness could also help us estimate the different
vehicle classes. In general, smoother texture tends to contain
less or larger vehicles. Fig. 5 shows some of features from an
image frame.
These features are then concatenated together to form a 17 ×
1 feature vector. This feature vector is the input vector (i.e., x)
in the regression module to estimate count of large vehicles.
C. Cascaded Regression
We are interested in three different vehicle classes (i.e.,
large, medium, and small size) corresponding to truck/bus,
SUV/minivan, and sedan, respectively. There are two reasons
for using three different classes. First, we tend to combine
vehicle counts and classes to estimate emissions on highways.

===== PAGE 5 =====

2882 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTA TION SYSTEMS, VOL. 16, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2015
Fig. 4. An example of warping and detection processes. (From left to right) 1) Nonlinear warping based on the estimated mesh grids (e.g., warping from t he
red rectangle to the green and yellow rectangles, respectively); 2) project ive transformation to reduce the dist ortions; 3) comparisons between wa rped results and
corresponding patches in the current fra me based on weighted normalized cross correlation; 4) de tection of unclassiﬁed vehicles that are below the c onvex hull
(red polygon).
Fig. 5. Illustration of some extracted features. ( a) Original image frame. (b) Foreground segments where red lines indicate segment length and width . (c) Segment
perimeter. (d) Horizontal edge length within the segments.
In the area of atmospheric environment, McGaughey et al.
applied a set of linear regressions to estimate relations be-
tween emission factors and diesel contribution for a Houston
tunnel [34]. Different classes of vehicles are manually counted
by observers on trafﬁc videos that have been captured. Our
algorithm is designed to automatically estimate counts and
emissions in real time. Secondly, as our cameras only capture
low resolution and low frame rate videos, it would be difﬁcult
to detect many different classes, and even speciﬁc models of
highway vehicles. There are four different classes, cars/jeeps,
light-duty trucks, medium-duty trucks (i.e., trucks with two
axles and six tires), and heavy-duty trucks (trucks with three
or more axles), are used in [34]. However, it is difﬁcult for us
to use these categories based on the criteria of number of axles
and tires. In our image frames, many tires and axles are invisible
due to occlusion and low video quality.
In statistics, regression analysis is often applied to build a
mapping from an input variable to a continuous output variable.
It has been widely used in the area of image processing. In the
area of intelligent transportation systems, different regression
algorithms have been applied to p redict travel time, forecast
trafﬁc ﬂow and detect trafﬁc incidents, and freeway trafﬁc states
[35]–[37]. In our algorithm, we need to build a regression
model from input variable, which is the 17 × 1 feature vector,
to the count of large, medium, and small vehicles, which are
our output variables. One possible solution is to assume the
counts of three vehicle classes a re independent with each other.
Then we can apply regression for three classes separately given
the same input feature vectors. However, this solution could
not be accurate or robust as the assumption of independence
is often not valid. Therefore, we apply a three-level cascaded
regression.
The ﬁrst level is the regression for the large vehicles as all
the features are less affected by the counts of medium and
small vehicles. The estimated count is treated as a feature and
concatenated to the original f eature vector. The new feature
vector is used as input variable for the second level to estimate
count of medium vehicles. Both counting results from these two
levels are concatenated to the original feature vector and used to
estimate the count of small vehicles. Fig. 6 shows the cascaded
regression framework.
We evaluate three different regression methods to ﬁnd out
which kind of regression method could be more suitable for our
application.
The simplest regression could be the linear regression that is
a linear combination of the input variables. We also could use
nonlinear functions of the input variables, such as polynomial
functions, spline functions, and logistic sigmoid functions.
These regression methods are parametric models, which could
be sensitive to nonlinearities of the input data and cause over-
ﬁtting when input variable is in a high-dimensional space.
Therefore, we ﬁrst evaluate th e Gaussian process, which could
be used to specify ﬂexible nonlinear regression for more com-
plex data set. However, the output variable by using Gaussian

===== PAGE 6 =====

LIANG et al.: COUNTING AND CLASSIFICA TION OF HIGHW A Y VEHICLES BY REGRESSION ANAL YSIS 2883
Fig. 6. Three-level cascaded regression. RLarge , RMe d i u m, RSmall are
regression modules for large, medium, and small vehicles respectively.
process could be negative, which cannot happen in our applica-
tion. Hence, the second regression method that we evaluate is
the Poisson regression that is mainly used to model count data.
For comparison purpose, we also evaluate the Bayesian Poisson
regression proposed in [23].
Gaussian Process: The regression model with Gaussian
noise is given by
y = f(x)+ ϵ (2)
where ϵ is a random noise variable that is independent for
each observation,y is the count of a vehicle class, and x denotes
the feature vector. The Gaussian likelihood for the count is
given by
p(y|f(x)) =N(y|f,σ
2I) (3)
where σ2 is the variance of noise. Based on the deﬁnition of a
Gaussian process, the Gaussi an prior has the zero mean and a
Gram matrix K as the covariance
p(x)= N(x|0, K). (4)
The kernel function k(x, x′) that determines K is given by
adding the squared exponential function, a linear term, and a
constant.
k(x, x′)= θ1 exp
(
−θ2
2 |x−x′|2
)
+θ3xT x′ +θ4 (5)
where θ=( θ1,θ2,θ3,θ4) are the hyperparameters and opti-
mized by maximizing the log likelihood p(y|θ). The linear and
constant terms in the kernel function are used to model the lin-
ear relation between input and output. The squared exponential
function could model the local nonlinearities that are caused by
occlusions and segmentation errors.
Suppose there is a new input x∗, let us deﬁne X =
(x1,..., xN)T and y =( y1,...,y N)T (N is the size of train-
Fig. 7. Sample images captured at different time intervals.
ing set), then the predictive distribution is given by
p(y∗|X,y,x∗)= N(m,σ2
∗) (6)
where
m = k(x∗,X)(K+σ2I)−1y
σ2
∗= k(x∗,x∗)−k(x∗,X)T(K+σ2I)−1k(X,x∗)
Poisson Regression: As the vehicle count is a nonnegative
integer, the typical regression choice is the Poisson regression
wherey ∼Poisson(μ). The canonical link is the log,
log(μ)= η= wTφ(x). (7)
Iterative reweighted least squares could be applied to ﬁt this
model. The update formula is w =( ΦRΦ)−1ΦTRz,w h e r e
R = Diag(μi) is the weight matrix, zi = ηi +(yi −μi)/μi,
andΦis the design matrix.
Bayesian Poisson Regression: A Bayesian model for count
regression is proposed in [23]. After approximations on the
posterior distribution p(w|X,y), the prediction distribution
could be modeled by a negative binomial distribution,
p(y∗|X,y,x∗)= NB(eμη,σ2
η) (8)
with mean and variance
μη= k(x∗,X)(K+Σy)−1t
σ2
η= k(x∗,x∗)−k(x∗,X)T(K+Σy)−1k(X,x∗)
whereΣy= Diag(1/(y1+c),..., 1/(yN+c)) andt=log(y+c)−
cΣy1. The kernel function we used here is same as the kernel
in (5).
IV . EXPERIMENTS
We remotely collected close to 70-minutes videos from a
local transportation department at different highway locations
at different time intervals. Image size is 352 × 240 and frame

===== PAGE 7 =====

2884 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTA TION SYSTEMS, VOL. 16, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2015
Fig. 8. Illustration of unreliable contour and SIFT features. (a) Two cons ecutive image frames. (b) Contours from the Canny method. (c) Contours from the
Laplacian of Gaussian method. (d) The SIFT feature points. The enlarged regions are from the same vehi cles, which contain 12 SIFT features and 1 SIFT fe ature,
respectively.
Fig. 9. Five consecutive image frames and their c orresponding foreground segments. Y ellow segments contain unclassiﬁed vehicles and white segment s contain
classiﬁed vehicles that have been classiﬁed in previous frame. All th e segments are extracted from the pre-deﬁned region of interest.
rate is only around 1 fps that may be caused by a slow network
transfer. In each image frame, we manually counted the new
entered vehicles according to t heir classes. These manually
counted results are used as the ground truth. A region of
interest (e.g., the region close to the camera) is selected for each
highway road. Fig. 7 shows sample images captured at different
time intervals.
Our algorithm is implemented using Matlab and can be run
in real time. The most time consuming part is the warping
algorithm, which is 0.16 ms on average. The prediction based
on the regression is around 3.4 × 10−4 ms per foreground
segment.
As mentioned in the related work, different features (e.g.,
contours and feature points) could be extracted for trafﬁc analy-
sis [2], [3], [7]–[11], [17]. These features could be used to ﬁt
into a 2-D/3-D vehicle model or be tracked over image frames.
Fig. 8 shows the extraction of two kinds of contour features
(the contours in the background have been removed) and the
SIFT feature points. As most contours are mixed together and
not distinguishable, they cannot be easily used to ﬁt into one
vehicle model. As the vehicle resolution is small, the number of
the SIFT features is very limited even we set the peak threshold
of the DoG scale space to the minimum. These SIFT features
are also highly inconsistent over image frames, which makes
the modeling and tracking difﬁcult.
For instance, SIFT features need to be matched and tracked
in the foreground segments in [7]. Motion vectors are then
grouped by a hierarchical clustering algorithm. As shown in
the enlarged regions in Fig. 8(d), the same vehicle in two
consecutive image frames contains 12 SIFT features and 1 SIFT
features, respectively. Therefore, it would be very difﬁcult to
match and track these SIFT features.
We believe that other similar feature extraction methods,
such as the Harris corner, would have the same problem. As
a result, many existing algorithms (e.g., [2], [3], [7]–[11], [17])
are not suitable for low quality videos and could easily fail to
extract features so that countin g and classiﬁcation are highly
inaccurate.
Many existing algorithms also need to segment individual
vehicles either before or after tracking. This segmentation itself
could be a difﬁcult problem when vehicle resolution is small
and severe occlusions present. As a result, in many existing
algorithms (e.g., [7], [13], [14], [20], [21]), we can only ﬁnd
segmentation of around two occluded vehicles.
Fig. 9 shows the ﬁve image frames and their corresponding
foreground segments. Because of the low frame rate, vehicles
often become very small after one image frame and are almost
invisible after two image frames. There are severe occlusions
in foreground segments. Each foreground segment could easily
contain many vehicles. The assumption of the weak perspective

===== PAGE 8 =====

LIANG et al.: COUNTING AND CLASSIFICA TION OF HIGHW A Y VEHICLES BY REGRESSION ANAL YSIS 2885
TABLE I
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON BY USING THREE REGRESSION METHODS AND DIFFERENT FEA TURES .B ASED ON ALL FEA TURES , THE BEST
CLASSIFICA TION RA TES FOR LARGE ,M EDIUM , AND SMALL VEHICLES ARE 92.7%, 63.4%, AND 79.9%, R ESPECTIVEL Y ,
WHICH ARE CORRESPONDING TO MEAN ABSOLUTE ERRORS 0.146, 0.732, AND 0.401
Fig. 10. The ground truth of small size vehicles in a trafﬁc video (around 30 minutes).
projection that has been used in some existing algorithms is also
not valid here.
Three different regression methods are evaluated, in which
training and testing data are completely separated. The absolute
error for each vehicle class ( err = 1
N
∑|ˆci −ci|,w h e r e ˆci
and ci are the estimated and true counts in the ith foreground
segment, andN is the number of foreground segments) is com-
puted. Table I shows the counting results for all the features and
different categories of features. In order to obtain an accurate
evaluation, the image frames that contain no or few vehicles
are removed in this experiment as these image frames are not
challenging and could greatly reduce the absolute errors. For
the selected image frames, th e number of small and medium
size vehicles in one foreground segment could reach up to 11
and the number of large size vehicles could reach up to 4. On
average, there are around 4 small and medium vehicles and 2
large vehicles in each foreground segment. We can ﬁnd that
the performance by using all the features is better than the
performance only using one kind of features. Our algorithm is
accurate and robust to count large size vehicles. For example,
the mean absolute error using all features and the Poisson
regression is 0.146 per foreground segment, which means the
algorithm could miscount 15 large size vehicles for every
100 foreground segments that contain around 200 large size
vehicles. For small and medium size vehicles, our algorithm
is less accurate. For example, the mean absolute error using
all features and the Bayesian Poisson is 0.732 per foreground
segment. Therefore, based on all features, the best classiﬁcation
rates for large, medium, and small vehicles are 92.7%, 63.4%,
and 79.9%, respectively, which are corresponding to mean
absolute errors 0.146, 0.732, and 0.401. As shown in Fig. 6,
the counting results for small and medium vehicles also reply
on the counting results of large vehicles. Therefore, the errors
made in the ﬁrst-level regression would be propagated to the
second and third level regression.
If the cascaded regression framework is not applied for small
and medium vehicles (i.e., the counts of different vehicles
in one segment are mutually independent), the counting and
classiﬁcation performance is further reduced. For example,
if the Poisson regression and all features are applied in this
experiment, the mean absolute errors could be increased from
0.752 (0.298) to 0.893 (0.429) for medium size vehicles and
from 0.401 (0.281) to 0.820 (0.231) for small size vehicles,
where the numbers in the parentheses are the corresponding
standard deviations.
The performance of Gaussian process is worse than other
two regression methods. Standard Poisson regression is slightly
better than the Bayesian Poisson regression proposed in [23].
One of possible reasons could be that vehicle counts (e.g., up to
11) generally are much less than the pedestrian counts (e.g., up
to 50). There are no enough local nonlinearities so that squared
exponential kernel function is not very useful comparing with
the linear kernel.
Figs. 10 and 11 show the count estimates using standard
Poisson regression and ground truth of small size vehicles
over a moderate trafﬁc video. The video length is close to

===== PAGE 9 =====

2886 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTA TION SYSTEMS, VOL. 16, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2015
Fig. 11. Our estimation of small size vehicles in the same trafﬁc video used in Fig. 10.
Fig. 12. The ground truth between 1000th and 1100th image frame in Fig. 10.
Fig. 13. Our estimation between 1000th and 1100th image frame in Fig. 11.
30 minutes. We can ﬁnd that these two distributions are similar.
This indicates that our estimation can be used to approximate
the trafﬁc density distribution. In terms of each image frame,
it is also common that there is a difference of 1 or 2 vehicles
between the ground truth and our estimation. We believe that it
could be difﬁcult to further reduce the errors unless image res-
olution and frame rate are increased. Figs. 12 and 13 show the
results between 1000th and 1100th image frame of Figs. 10 and
11.
V. D
ISCUSSION
In many segmentation based algorithms, the boundary of an
individual vehicle or the boundaries shared by multiple vehicles
need to be estimated. However, the boundary estimation could
be considered as a more difﬁcult problem than the vehicle
counting itself. One advantage of using regression analysis is
that the vehicle boundary estimation is not required and the
counting problem can be addressed directly. The major factor
that affects our algorithm pe rformance is the feature vector
extracted from the foreground segment. Normalization of these
features based on the smoothing splines is an important step
to reduce the effects from perspective projection. Without this
step, the small size vehicles close to the camera could have
some similar features with the large size vehicles far away from
the camera.
Another advantage of using regression analysis is that pre-
diction stage of regression is often very fast. All the regression
methods we used could make predictions in real time. It is
also possible to choose other supervised learning techniques to
learn the relation between the f eature vector and the vehicle
count, such as a neural network. For sufﬁciently large number
of hidden units, a two-layer neural network could have a similar
performance of Gaussian process.
Our algorithm is mainly designed to count and classify
highway vehicles. Without ﬁnding individual vehicles, it is not
easy to extend our algorithm to other applications, such as
detection of complex events for urban trafﬁc. This could be one
limitation of the algorithm.
Our algorithm is currently trained and evaluated at different
time intervals during daytime. However, our algorithm still
cannot handle many different w eather conditions, such as the
“transition” weather condition presented in [29]. This is another
limitation of the algorithm. For example, our experiments are
currently conducted when small shadow areas present. How-
ever, features could be strongly affected by large shadow areas.
In order to improve robustness, it could be useful to add shadow
removal to our framework. Our algorithm also could not be
applied during nighttime. One reason is that vehicle features
could not quite different during daytime and nighttime. In
order to partially solve the problem, we could train multiple
regression models based on different time intervals.
VI. C
ONCLUSION
In this paper, we present a counting and classiﬁcation algo-
rithm for highway vehicles. Unlike many existing algorithms,

===== PAGE 10 =====

LIANG et al.: COUNTING AND CLASSIFICA TION OF HIGHW A Y VEHICLES BY REGRESSION ANAL YSIS 2887
our algorithm requires no explicit segmentation of individual
vehicles. Our algorithm also does not rely on tracking of robust
features. Given a set of low level features, we apply a cascaded
regression model to count and classify vehicles directly. We
have tested our algorithm on low quality videos that last more
than one hour. We show that our algorithm can deal with the
trafﬁc with severe occlusions and very low vehicle resolutions.
Our algorithm is suitable for vision based systems that are
non-intrusive and can be mounted many places near highways.
Our algorithm could be further applied for estimation of trafﬁc
density and vehicle emissions. Looking into the future, there are
many areas that could be improved. One immediate step is to
apply more sophisticated algorithms for background estimation
and shadow removal.
R
EFERENCES
[1] N. Buch, S. A. V elastin, and J. Orwell, “A review of computer vision
techniques for the analysis of urban trafﬁc,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp.
Syst., vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 920–939, Sep. 2011.
[2] J. Lou, T. Tan, W. Hu, H. Y ang, and S. J. Maybank, “3-D model-
based vehicle tracking,” IEEE Trans. Image Process. , vol. 14, no. 10,
pp. 1561–1569, Oct. 2005.
[3] C. C. C. Pang, W. W. L. Lam, and N. H. C. Y ung, “A method for vehicle
count in the presence of multiple-vehicle occlusions in trafﬁc images,”
IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 441–459, Sep. 2007.
[4] B. Johansson, J. Wiklund, P .-E. F orssén, and G. Granlund, “Combining
shadow detection and simulation for estimation of vehicle size and posi-
tion,” Pattern Recognit. Lett., vol. 30, no. 8, pp. 751–759, Jun. 2009.
[5] T. Gao, Z. Liu, W. Gao, and J. Zhang, “Moving vehicle tracking based on
sift active particle choosing,” in Advances in Neuro-Information Process-
ing. Berlin, Germany: Springer-V erlag, 2009, pp. 695–702.
[6] D. G. Lowe, “Distinctive image feat ures from scale-invariant keypoints,”
Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 91–110, 2004.
[7] G. Jun, J. Aggarwal, and M. Gokmen, “Tracking and segmentation of
highway vehicles in cluttered and crowded scenes,” in Proc. IEEE WACV,
2008, pp. 1–6.
[8] Z. Kim and J. Malik, “Fast vehicle detection with probabilistic feature
grouping and its application to vehicle tracking,” in Proc. 9th IEEE Int.
Conf. Comput. Vis., 2003, pp. 524–531.
[9] M. J. Leotta and J. L. Mundy, “V ehicle surveillance with a generic,
adaptive, 3D vehicle model,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. ,
vol. 33, no. 7, pp. 1457–1469, 2011.
[10] X. Ma and W. E. L. Grimson, “Edge-based rich representation for
vehicle classiﬁcation,” in Proc. T enth IEEE ICCV , 2005, vol. 2,
pp. 1185–1192.
[11] N. Buch, J. Orwell, and S. A. V el astin, “3D extended histogram of ori-
ented gradients (3dhog) for classiﬁca tion of road users in urban scenes,”
in Proc. BMVC, 2009, pp. 1–11.
[12] S. Messelodi, C. M. Modena, and M. Zanin, “A computer vision system
for the detection and classiﬁcation of vehicles at urban road intersections,”
Pattern Anal. Appl., vol. 8, no. 1/2, pp. 17–31, 2005.
[13] S. Gupte, O. Masoud, R. F. Martin , and N. P . Papanikolopoulos, “De-
tection and classiﬁcation of vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. ,
vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 37–47, Mar. 2002.
[14] J.-W. Hsieh, S.-H. Y u, Y .-S. Chen, and W.-F. Hu, “Automatic trafﬁc
surveillance system for vehicle tracking and classiﬁcation,” IEEE Trans.
Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 175–187, Jun. 2006.
[15] D. Alonso, L. Salgado, and M. Nie to, “Robust vehicle detection through
multidimensional classiﬁcation for on board video based systems,” in
Proc. IEEE ICIP, 2007, vol. 4, pp. IV -321–IV -324.
[16] C. Gentile, O. Camps, and M. Sznaier, “Segmentation for robust tracking
in the presence of severe occlusion,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 13,
no. 2, pp. 166–178, Feb. 2004.
[17] N. K. Kanhere, S. J. Pundlik, and S. T. Birchﬁeld, “V ehicle segmentation
and tracking from a low-angle off-axis camera,” in Proc. IEEE CVPR ,
2005, vol. 2, pp. 1152–1157.
[18] X. Song and R. Nevatia, “A model-based vehicle segmentation method
for tracking,” in Proc. 10th IEEE ICCV , 2005, vol. 2, pp. 1124–1131.
[19] S. Kamijo, Y . Matsushita, K. Ikeuc hi, and M. Sakauchi, “Trafﬁc monitor-
ing and accident detection at intersections,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp.
Syst., vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 108–118, Jun. 2000.
[20] C.-L. Huang and W.-C. Liao, “A vision-based vehicle identiﬁcation sys-
tem,” in Proc. 17th ICPR
, 2004, vol. 4, pp. 364–367.
[21] W. Zhang, Q. J. Wu, X. Y ang, and X. Fang, “Multilevel framework to
detect and handle vehicle occlusion,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. ,
vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 161–174, Mar. 2008.
[22] R. Jiang, M. Terauchi, R. K lette, S. Wang, and T. V audrey, Low-Level
Image Processing for Lane Detection and Tracking . Berlin, Germany:
Springer-V erlag, 2010.
[23] A. B. Chan and N. V asconcelos, “Counting people with low-level features
and Bayesian regression,” IEEE Trans. Image Process. , vol. 21, no. 4,
pp. 2160–2177, Apr. 2012.
[24] N. K. Kanhere and S. T. Birchﬁeld, “ Real-time incremental segmentation
and tracking of vehicles at low camera angles using stable features,” IEEE
Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 148–160, Mar. 2008.
[25] P . Kumar, S. Ranganath, and H. Weimin, “Bayesian network based com-
puter vision algorithm for trafﬁc monitoring using video,” in Proc. IEEE
Intell. Transp. Syst., 2003, vol. 1, pp. 897–902.
[26] B. Morris and M. Trivedi, “Robust classiﬁcation and tracking of vehicles
in trafﬁc video streams,” in Proc. IEEE ITSC, 2006, pp. 1078–1083.
[27] J.-S. Hu and T.-M. Su, “Robust background subtraction with shadow
and highlight removal for indoor surveillance,” EURASIP J. Appl. Signal
Process., vol. 2007, no. 1, p. 108, Jan. 2007.
[28] A. Elgammal, D. Harwood, and L. Davis, “Non-parametric model
for background subtraction,” in Computer Vision—ECCV . Berlin,
Germany: Springer-V erlag, 2000, pp. 751–767.
[29] L. Unzueta et al. , “Adaptive multicue background subtraction for robust
vehicle counting and classiﬁcation,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. ,
vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 527–540, Jun. 2012.
[30] S. Atev, G. Miller, and N. P . Papanikolopoulos, “Clustering of vehicle
trajectories,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 647–657,
Sep. 2010.
[31] K. Kim, D. Lee, and I. Essa, “Gaussian process regression ﬂow for analy-
sis of motion trajectories,” in Proc. IEEE ICCV, 2011, pp. 1164–1171.
[32] F. L. Bookstein, “Principal warps: T hin-plate splines and the decomposi-
tion of deformations,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. , vol. 11,
no. 6, pp. 567–585, Jun. 1989.
[33] A. N. Marana, L. d. F. Costa, R. Lotufo, and S. V elastin, “On the efﬁcacy
of texture analysis for crowd monitoring,” in Proc. SIBGRAPI , 1998,
pp. 354–361.
[34] G. R. McGaughey et al., “Analysis of motor vehicle emissions in a Hous-
ton tunnel during the Texas Air Quality Study 2000,” Atmosp. Environ.,
vol. 38, no. 20, pp. 3363–3372, Jun. 2004.
[35] C.-H. Wu, J.-M. Ho, and D.-T. Lee, “Travel-time prediction with sup-
port vector regression,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. , vol. 5, no. 4,
pp. 276–281, Dec. 2004.
[36] S. Tang and H. Gao, “Trafﬁc-incident detection-algorithm based on non-
parametric regression,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. , vol. 6, no. 1,
pp. 38–42, Mar. 2005.
[37] L. Li, X. Chen, and L. Zhang, “Multimodel ensemble for freeway traf-
ﬁc state estimations,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. , vol. 15, no. 3,
Jun. 2014.
Mingpei Liang received the B.S. degree in electrical
engineering from Beijing University, Beijing, China.
He is currently working toward the master’s degree
in computer science with North Carolina Central
University, Durham, NC, USA, under the supervi-
sion of Dr. X. Huang and Dr. A. Tokuta. He is
currently with NetBrain Technologies Inc., Boston,
MA, USA. His research interests include computer
vision and image processing.
Xinyu Huang received the B.S. degree in mechan-
ical engineering from Huazhong University of Sci-
ence and Technology, Wuhan, China, the M.S. de-
gree in computer science from Eastern Kentucky
University, Richmond, KY , USA, and the Ph.D. de-
gree in computer science from the University of
Kentucky, Lexington, KY . He is currently an Assis-
tant Professor with the Department of Mathematics
and Computer Science, North Carolina Central Uni-
versity, Durham, NC, USA. His research interests
include computer vision, image processing, pattern
recognition, and machine learning.

===== PAGE 11 =====

2888 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTA TION SYSTEMS, VOL. 16, NO. 5, OCTOBER 2015
Chung-Hao Chen received the B.S. and M.S. de-
grees in computer science and information engineer-
ing from Fu Jen Catholic University, New Taipei
City, Taiwan, in 1997 and 2001, respectively, and
the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from The
University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, USA, in
2009. In 2009, he joined the Department of Math-
ematics and Computer Science, North Carolina Cen-
tral University, Durham, NC, USA, as an Assistant
Professor and retained this position until 2011. He is
currently an Assistant Professor with the Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Old Dominion University, Norfolk,
V A, USA. His research interests incl ude object tracking, robotics, and image
processing.
Xin Chen received the B.S. degree in computer sci-
ence from the University of Science and Technology
of China, Hefei, China, and the M.S. and Ph.D. de-
grees in computer science and engineering from the
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, USA.
He is a Senior Research Scientist and an Engineering
Manager at HERE (a Nokia c ompany), Chicago, IL,
USA. He is also the University Cooperation Ambas-
sador for the Nokia Intell ectual Property Business
Unit. Currently, he is an Adjunct Professor at the
Department of Computer Science, Illinois Institute
of Technology, and the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science, Northwestern University.
Alade Tokuta received the B.S. and M.S. de-
grees in electrical engineering from Duke University,
Durham, NC, USA, the E.E. degree in electrical
engineering from Columbia University, New Y ork,
NY , and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering
and computer science from the University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL, USA. Currently, he is a Professor
at the Department of Mathematics and Computer
Science, North Carolina Central University, Durham.
His research interests include robotics, computer
image synthesis/vision, networking, and algorithm
design.