

===== PAGE 1 =====

IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 18, NO. 23, DECEMBER 1, 2018 9829
Parking Detection Method Based on Finite-State
Machine and Collaborative Decision-Making
Hongmei Zhu, Shengzhong Feng, and Fengqi Yu
Abstract— A high-accurate parking detection method for
wireless magnetic sensor networks is proposed in this paper,
which is based on the combination of ﬁnite-state machine and
collaborative decision-making. The magnetic disturbance induced
by a vehicle can be sensed and processed to obtain the availability
of a parking space by a magnetic sensor. However, the main
challenge lies in the difﬁculty of eliminating the interferences
from adjacent vehicles that decrease the accuracy. The vehicles
include moving vehicles on adjacent roads and parking vehi-
cles in adjacent parking spaces. For simplicity and low-energy
consumption, a multi-interim ﬁnite-state machine (MiFSM) is
proposed to deal with the interferences from moving vehicles.
Our method contains preliminary detection and ﬁnal detection.
Using MiFSM, most of the parking vehicles can be correctly
detected in the preliminary detection. However, the adjacent
parking vehicles may cause more complicated interferences. It is
hard to distinguish these interferences from the disturbances
induced by “weak-magnetic” vehicles above on the detecting
sensor. The “weak-magnetic” vehicles cause small magnetic
disturbance because of their high chassis or short car-body.
Therefore, by using the collaborative information of adjacent
sensors, a Dempster–Shafer evidence theory-based collaborative
decision-making is developed to cope with these complicated
interferences in the ﬁnal detection. The experimental results
show that our work has a signiﬁcant improvement in detection
accuracy, as about 99.8% for vehicle arrival and 99.9% for
vehicle departure. The proposed method can also be extended
for moving vehicle detection, speed estimation, and vehicle
classiﬁcation in the applications of intelligent trafﬁc system.
Index Terms— Parking detection, vehicle detection, ﬁnite state
machine, collaborative decision making, WSN.
I. I NTRODUCTION
P
ARKING difﬁculty becomes one of the serious issues
for sustainable urban development with the increased
number of cars [1]. The effort to deploy smart parking
system (SPS) is always a strategic solution for resolving the
parking problem [2]. For administrators, the SPS manages and
maximizes the utilization of parking lots. For users, it provides
the availability info rmation of parking spaces and dynamic
Manuscript received July 20, 2018; revised September 9, 2018; accepted
September 18, 2018. Date of publicatio n September 24, 2018; date of current
version November 13, 2018. This work was supported in part by the National
Key R&D Plan under Grant 2016YFC0105002 and Grant 61674162, in part
by the Shenzhen Key Lab for RF Integr ated Circuits, Shenzhen Shared
Technology Service Center for Inte rnet of Things, Guangdong Government
Funds, under Grant 2015B010104005, in part by Shenzhen Government
Funds under Grant JCYJ20160331192843950, and in part by the Shenzhen
Peacock Plan. The associate editor coordinating the review of this paper and
approving it for publication was Dr. Rosario Morello. (Corresponding author:
Fengqi Yu.)
The authors are with the Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technol-
ogy, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen 518055, China (e-mail:
fq.yu@siat.ac.cn).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/JSEN.2018.2871869
driving guide. It has been reported that the SPS is efﬁciently
implemented via sensor-based vehicle detectors [3]. These
detectors connect with each ot her though wireless sensor
networks (WSNs) and update the status of parking space in
real-time [4].
Different types of detectors, such as inductive-loop, ultra-
sonic, camera, and magnetic sensor, have been used to monitor
the status of parking spaces. The inductive-loop detector is a
mature technology which is usually installed in trafﬁc intersec-
tion and parking entrance [5]. However, it needs to cut road-
surface and interrupt trafﬁc which are the obvious drawbacks.
The ultrasonic-based solution has many advantages, such as
high-accuracy and easy installation. However, it is sensitive
to extreme air turbulence and temperature ﬂuctuation [6].
With the development of image processing technology, video
detection gains a growing attention in nowadays [7]. Video
detection has many special advantages, such as rich infor-
mation and visibility. However, its performance is affected
by light condition that largely limits its application of the
SPS. Compared with these sensors, the magnetic sensor merits
in low cost, small size, excellent privacy, weather immunity,
and easy for large-scale deployment [8]. Numerous research
works based on magnetic sensors were proposed for vehicle
detection [9]. The methods used in these works can be roughly
divided into four categories: threshold based, cross-correlation
based, machine learning based, and data fusion based method.
Due to the simplicity and efﬁciency of the threshold based
method, it becomes the most popular one. S. Y . Cheung et al.
veriﬁed the validity and practicability of the magnetic sensor
for vehicle detection [10]. In their work, a total of 330 out
of 332 vehicles were detected by using a threshold-based state
machine method in the California PATH Program. However,
this method is vulnerable, susceptive to noises and base-
line drift. To remove baseline drift, an adaptive threshold
method was proposed in [11]. Besides, Yang and Lei [12]
introduced a ﬁxed threshold state machine method for low-
speed vehicle detection with a high accuracy of 99.05%.
A magnetic ﬁeld model based detection method was designed
for vehicle detection in [13]. The accuracy was up to 99%.
A second adaptive double window vehicle detection algorithm
(SA-DWVDA) with an accuracy about 98% was proposed
in [14]. Furthermore, Q. Wang et al. proposed a novel
adapted threshold state machine algorithm for street parking
detection [15]. An accuracy of 97.5% was observed in their
work. In [16] a dynamic threshold detection method was
provided with an accuracy of 97.92%. Although a number of
studies have been done, as described above, the accuracy of
1558-1748 © 2018 I EEE. Personal u se is perm itted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:25:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 2 =====

9830 IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 18, NO. 23, DECEMBER 1, 2018
Fig. 1. The two types of interference induced by the adjacent parking vehicle
and the moving vehicle respectively.
threshold-based method needs to be improved in order to meet
the requirements of real applications.
To improve the accuracy, the cross-correlation based method
was presented in several works. Wang et al. [17] proposed a
cross-correlation method for moving vehicle detection, where
a vehicle was modeled as a magnetic dipole and the reference
was based on the sensed magnetic disturbance by the vehicle.
A reference based on K-means clustering was proposed for
parking vehicle detection in our previous work [18]. Recently,
a fusion algorithm based on waveform similarity was presented
by Zhang et al. [19]. Nonetheless, the difﬁculty lies in obtain-
ing an optimal reference signal which determines the detection
accuracy.
In addition, the machine learning based method was also
proposed to improve the performance. A signal classiﬁcation
based method, where the status of a parking space was divided
into “occupied” and “vacant”, was developed for parking
detection [20]. The structure and theoretical model were built
in [21]. However, because of the heavy calculation burden,
this method is difﬁcult to be implemented on a sensor node.
Moreover, many research works applying sensor fusion
technique were proposed to improve the detection accuracy.
In order to achieve low-energy consumption, an optical-waked
magnetic sensor node for parking detection was provided
in [22]. A fusion of magnetic sensor and camera was pro-
posed for vehicle detection in [23]. To achieve high accuracy,
fusion method attracts more and more attentions for parking
detection [24], [25]. However, this method increases the cost
and do not satisfy the need of large-scale deployment in SPS.
We can conclude that the threshold-based method is the
most efﬁcient and simplest way implemented on a magnetic
sensor node. However, its detection accuracy needs to be
improved. The disturbances fro m adjacent vehicles, including
moving vehicles and parking vehicles, may induce mistakes in
detection, as shown in Fig. 1. Few publications have taken the
interferences into considerati on. Therefore, our work focuses
on dealing with the interfere nces from adjacent vehicles.
Our work contains two modules: multi-interim ﬁnite-state
machine (MiFSM) for preliminar y detection and collaborative
decision-making based on Demps ter-Shafer evidence theory
(DS-CDM) for ﬁnal detection. The state machine is proven to
be both high-efﬁcient and computationally simple [26]. Most
of vehicles can be correctly det ected because the disturbances
are usually strong enough for decision. However, because of
the interferences, a few vehicles are missed or false alarmed.
So, the D-S theory is used to deal with the uncertainty. The
D-S theory is a mathematical theory of evidence proposed by
Dempster [27] and developed by G. Shafer in the 1970’s. Due
to its effectiveness in processing uncertain information, it has
been widely applied to the ﬁelds of decision analysis, diagnos-
tics, and statistical inference [28]. Therefore, the combination
of MiFSM and DS-CDM is proposed in our work. The main
contributions of our paper are listed as following.
First, by eliminating the in terferences from adjacent vehi-
cles, our work provides a high-accurate solution without
adding any other sensors. It simpliﬁes the system and lowers
the power consumption. Secondly, due to the simplicity of the
MiFSM and efﬁciency of the DS-CDM, our method achieves a
good balance between the accura cy and energy-consumption.
Finally, the performance of this method is immune to the
conditions of weather and light. In addition, the convenience
of installation and maintenance is also remarkable since there
is no need for cutting road-surface and interrupting trafﬁc.
The proposed method has been tested in a real parking
lot. To ensure the reliability of the proposed method, our
test includes different driver behaviors and different types of
vehicles.
The remaining of this paper is organized as follows.
Section II provides an overview of the proposed parking
detection method. The detailed procedure of the combina-
tion of MiFSM and DS-CDM are presented in Section III.
Section IV describes the har dware setup and testing plat-
form. The experimental veriﬁcation is presented in Section V .
Finally, Section VI contains the conclusion and future research
work.
II. T
HE OVERVIEW OF THE PROPOSED SOLUTION
A. Fundamental Principle of Parking Detection by Using
Magnetic Sensors in WSN
All vehicles have signiﬁcant amount of ferrous metal which
can produce a disturbance to the Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld. This
disturbance can be sensed and processed by a magnetic sensor
node. In our work, a three-axis magnetic sensor node is
used to measure the magnetic ﬁeld in X, Y , and Z axes
simultaneously. As shown in Fig. 2, the X-axis is parallel to
the direction of vehicle moving, Y-axis is perpendicular to the
X-axis, and the Z-axis is perpendicular to the earth surface and
upward.
It was reported that the measurement is related to vehicle’s
metallic structure and size [10]. In General, the engine and
axle steels make a signiﬁcant distortion to magnetic ﬁeld
since they contain a great mount of ferromagnetic material,
as shown in Fig. 3. So, the waves induced by a same vehicle
and measured by different sensors are similar based on a
great number of experiments. Therefore, the collaborative
information of adjacent senso r nodes can be used for vehicle
detection.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:25:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 3 =====

ZHU et al.: PARKING DETECTION METHOD BASED ON FINITE-STATE MACHINE AND COLLABORATIVE DECISION-MAKING 9831
Fig. 2. The direction of vehicle and magnetic sensor node.
Fig. 3. Different parts of a vehicle cause different distortions to the magnetic
ﬁeld.
Fig. 4. The original signal and pre-pr ocessed signal of magnetic ﬂuctuation
sensed by a tri-axial magnetic sensor.
B. Parking Detection Method
In order to eliminate the inﬂuence induced by different
sensitivity of axis, the signal pre-processing is carried out after
data sampling according to Eq. (1). An example of the original
signal and pre-processed signal is demonstrated in Fig. 4.
M =
√
(x − x0)2 + (y − y0)2 + (z − z0)2 (1)
where, x, y,a n d z are sampled data in X, Y , and Z axis
respectively, x0, y0,a n dz0 are the baseline values accordingly.
Using the pre-processed signal, the parking detection has
two steps: MiFSM for preliminary detection and DS-CDM
for ﬁnal detection.
(1) MiFSM: Due to the temporary feature, the interferences
induced by adjacent moving vehicles can be ﬁltered by a state
Fig. 5. The state transition diagram of the MiFSM.
machine with several “transient” states. Therefore, four “ tran-
sient” states have been designed as the interim states in the
MiFSM module. In this preliminary detection, most of parking
vehicles can be correctly detected. However, the adjacent
parking vehicle may cause the complicated interference which
is difﬁcult to be distinguished from the disturbance induced by
a “weak-magnetic” vehicle above on the detecting node. The
“weak-magnetic” vehicles are a few vehicles that cause small
ﬂuctuations because of their high chassis or short car-body.
Therefore, two “ critical” states ( possible-arrivalor possible-
departure) are designed for these uncertain states. Therefore,
the output of MiFSM may be still uncertain or already reach a
conclusion. If it is a decided state, the output is considered as
the ﬁnal result. Otherwise, the DS-CDM nodule is triggered
to deal with the uncertainty for ﬁnal detection.
(2) DS-CDM: Taking the advantages of effectiveness
and practicability in processing uncertain information, the
DS-CDM module based on adjacent sensors is developed
to cope with these complicat ed interferences from adjacent
parking vehicles. In this step, the uncertainty results (“critical”
states) are transferred to ﬁnal detections ( occupied or vacant).
III. T
HE PROPOSED PARKING DETECTION METHOD
A. The MiFSM Module for Preliminary Detection
1) The State Transition of MiFSM: A MiFSM method intro-
ducing multi interim states is proposed. As shown in Fig. 5,
there are nine states in the MiFSM. The deﬁnition of each
state is listed in Table I.
In brief, at ﬁrst the MiFSM is started for preliminary
detection. All parameters are reset to initial values in S0.
It is assumed that there is no vehicle parked in the parking
space in the initial state. S1is the “occupied” state which is
a decided state. Because, the interferences from the adjacent
moving vehicles usually appear in a short time. The ﬁrst
“interim” state for arrival-decision ( S2) and for departure-
decision (S6) are designed for dealing with these interferences.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:25:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 4 =====

9832 IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 18, NO. 23, DECEMBER 1, 2018
TABLE I
THE STATES OF MIFSM
TABLE II
STATISTICAL RESULTS FOR PARAMETER SELECTION
The second “ interim” state for arrival-decision ( S3) and for
departure-decision (S7)are designed for further reconﬁrmation
due to interferences. During the arrival or departure detection,
the short-lived interferences from other vehicles or background
noise can be ﬁltered out. Most of vehicles can be correctly
recognized as a decided state ( S1 or S5).
However, due to the complicated interferences from adjacent
parking vehicles, the “ critical” states S4 and S8 are deﬁned
for arrival-decision and departu re-decision, respectively. The
“critical” states are uncertain states which is expected to be
transferred into decided states through the DS-CDM module.
2) Discussion of the Parameter Selection: As described
above, the transition conditions of MiFSM depend on several
pre-deﬁned thresholds. Therefore, the selection of the thresh-
olds is the key in the design of state-machine.
In order to collect real experimental data, our system is
deployed in a commercial parking lot for six years. More than
two thousand vehicles have been recorded. The typical mag-
netic ﬂuctuations caused by 30 vehicles are shown in Fig. 6.
The tested vehicles are classiﬁed as mini car (Minicar), small
car (SmallCar), and sports utility vehicle (SUV). In this work,
2379 vehicles, including 352 minicars, 1448 small cars, and
579 SUVs, have been recorded by our system in the past six
years. The statistical results are shown in Table II. Three kinds
of information are recorded in Fig. 6.
1) First, the average amplitude of magnetic ﬂuctuations
caused by vehicle-arrivals and veh icle-departures is recorded.
This information help u s select the thresholds T
max and
Tmin . In order to distinguish the magnetic disturbance
caused by “weak-magnetic” vehicle and interferences, two
thresholds Tmax and Tmin are deﬁned. From the statisti-
cal results in Table II we can see that the amplitudes
of the magnetic disturbance caused by most of the vehi-
cles are stronger than 80 mGS. However, a few vehicles
cause small ﬂuctuations (40 ∼60 mGS) which are hard to
be distinguished from some int erferences caused by adjacent
vehicles.
As an example shown in Fig. 7, there are 7 disturbances.
Disturbances 1 and 2 are induced by the parking vehicles,
which are a “weak-magnetic” vehicle and a normal vehicle
respectively, on the detected sensor node. The average ampli-
tude of the disturbance 1 is 75 mGS. Disturbances 3 ∼7a r e
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:25:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 5 =====

ZHU et al.: PARKING DETECTION METHOD BASED ON FINITE-STATE MACHINE AND COLLABORATIVE DECISION-MAKING 9833
Fig. 6. The typical average amplitude of the magnetic ﬂuctuations cau sed by 30 vehicles and the number of interim states accordingly.
Fig. 7. The average amplitude of magnetic ﬂuctuations caused b y 30 vehicles and the number of interim states accordingly.
caused by adjacent vehicles. Am ong these disturbances, most
of them are lower than 40 mGS, e.g. the interferences 1 ∼4.
However, if the adjacent vehicle is very close to the sensor
node, it can cause a strong disturbance. The amplitude may
reach 40∼80 mGS, e.g. the interference 7. Therefore we set
the T
max = 80 mGS and Tmin = 40 mGS.
2) Second, the amplitude of ma gnetic ﬂuctuations caused
by interim states, which may be interferences or parking-
events, is presented. This information help us choose the
thresholds for interim states Thavl and Thdpt .I no r d e rt o
improve the accuracy of parking d etection, the interim states
are designed for capturing the transient information which
is used to suppress the background noises and interferences
from moving vehicles. So, Th
avl and Thdpt are thresholds for
deﬁning the interim states for arrival-decision and departure-
decision, respectively. From the statistical results, Th
avl and
Thdpt are set as 25 mGS.
3) Third, the number of interim states is recorded for
selecting the thresholds Navl1, Navl2, Ndpt 1 and Ndpt 2.T h e s e
parameters are deﬁned for counting the interim states. And
their values are related to the sampling frequency which is set
as 10 Hz. In our work, N
avl1, Navl2, Ndpt 1 and Ndpt 2 are set
as 5.
B. The DS-CDM Module for the Final Detection
1) Different Situations for Critical States: Three situations
of “ critical” state for possible-arrival on sensor i are taken
into consideration, as shown in Fig. 8.
In situation 1 and 3, the “ critical” states are caused by the
parking vehicle in adjacent parking space i − 1o r i + 1.
The adjacent parking vehicles are a little off the center of
their parking spaces and close to sensor i. In these situa-
tions, the “ critical” states should be transferred to “ vacant”
state ( S1) in the ﬁnal detection step by using DS-CDM
module.
In situation 2, the “ critical” state induced by a “weak-
magnetic” vehicle above sensor i should be transferred to
“occupied” state. Actually, the possibility of two vehicles
parking next to each other at the same time is very small.
So, the disturbances detected by sensor i and adjacent sensors
at the same time are considered to be induced by a same
vehicle.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:25:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 6 =====

9834 IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 18, NO. 23, DECEMBER 1, 2018
Fig. 8. The parking “ critical” states on magnetic sensor i.
The situations of “ critical” state for possible-departure on
sensor i are similar. The only difference is that the ﬂuctuation
is produced by the vehicle departure.
2) D-S Evidence Theory: The D-S evidence theory is an
efﬁcient method to process uncertain information by fusing
several evidences into a new one. As a result, based on
the combination of the evidences, a more reliable decision
can be made. The theory is based on the nonempty dis-
cernment frame which is a ﬁnite -set containing all possi-
ble answers for a certain problem domain. The “ critical”
states aim to be transferred to the “ occupied” state or the
“vacant” state. Therefore, the discernment frame is expressed
as /Theta1={ occupied, vacant}. Suppose that E
1,E 2,..., En
are n evidences, m1, m2,..., mn are n basic probability
assignment (BPA) functions resulted from each evidence. The
BPA function m
i that is also named mass function with the
mapping 2 /Theta1→[ 0, 1], and mi(φ) = 0, /Theta1∑
x⊆ mi (x) = 1.
When ∀x ⊆ /Theta1, D-S combination rule for n mass functions on
/Theta1is shown in
P = (m1 ⊕ m2 ⊕···⊕ mn)( x)
= 1
K
∑
x1∩x2∩···∩xn=x
m1 (x1) · m2 (x2) ··· mn (xn) (2)
where, K is the normalization constant and can be obtained
by
K =
∑
x1∩x2∩···∩xn̸=∅
m1 (x1) · m2 (x2) ··· mn (xn)
= 1 −
∑
x1∩x2∩···∩xn=∅
m1(x1) · m2(x2) ··· mn(xn) (3)
According to the combination of different evidences on the
same discernment frame, the calculated ﬁnal result can be
taken as a basis of decision for uncertainty. In order to deal
with the interferences from adjacent vehicles, the collaborative
information from adjacent senso rs is provided for ﬁnal deci-
sion making. Because the vehicle arrival and departure have
different signal structures, the different evidences of vehicle
arrival and departure are introduced as follows.
3) Evidences for Possible-Arrival: The discernment frame
is expressed as /Theta1={ occupied, vacant}. Through observation
and analysis of large number of experimental results, four
evidences are deﬁned and corresponding mass functions are
constructed as following.
1) E
1a: The sensor i is the detection target. If there is a
vehicle arriving at the parking spacei, a signiﬁcant disturbance
will be measured. Otherwise, the disturbance will be relatively
weak. Therefore, the amplitude of magnetic ﬂuctuation sensed
by sensor i is introduced for the ﬁrst evidence for arrival
detection, E 1a. Accordingly, the mass function m1acan be
deﬁned as
⎧
⎨
⎩
m1a (occupied) =
 Mi − Tmin
Tmax − Tmin
γ
m1a (vacant) = 1 − m1a (occupied)
(4)
where
 Mi is the average of pre-processed value described
i nE q .( 1 ) ,s e n s e db ys e n s o ri.T h e Tmax and Tmin are the
pre-deﬁned maximum and minimum thresholds for “ criti-
cal” states in the MiFSM, as Tmin ≤
 Mi ≤ Tmax . The
m1a(occupied) denotes the BPA for “ occupied” state by the
E1a.I nt h es a m ew a y ,t h em1a(vacant) denotes the BPA for
“vacant” state by E 1a. Usually, the different mass functions
have different contributions to the ﬁnal decision. Some evi-
dences take more weight on decision. A factor γ is used to
adjust the weighting in BPA for E 1.
2) E2a: The collaborative information between the adjacent
magnetic sensor nodes is introduced as an evidence. So, the
amplitude of magnetic ﬂuctua tion sensed by the adjacent
sensor in space i-1 is used for the second evidence E 2a.I t s
mass function is described as (5).
⎧
⎪⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪⎨
⎪⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪⎪⎩
m
2a (occupied) =
⎧
⎪⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
Mi−1
Tmin
α, 0 ≤
 Mi−1 < Tmin
Mi−1
M
α, Tmin ≤
 Mi−1 < Tmax
0,
 Mi−1 ≥ Tmax
m2a (vacant) = 1 − m2a (occupied)
(5)
where
 Mi−1 is the average of pre-processed value sensed by
sensor i − 1. The ratio of
 Mi−1 and
 Mi is introduced as the
basic probability for “ occupied” state. If 0 ≤
 Mi−1 < Tmin ,
the sensed signal is lower than the minimum threshold for
“critical” states. In this situation, there is no vehicle arrival in
space i − 1. It can be considered as the interference induced
by an adjacent parking vehicl e or another moving vehicle.
If T
min ≤
 Mi−1 < Tmax , it is in the range of “ critical” state.
Therefore, the sensed signal can be caused by an adjacent
parking vehicle or a “weak-magnetic” parking vehicle in space
i − 1. If
 Mi−1 ≥ Tmax , it is stronger than the
 Mi . So, it is
considered that there may be a vehicle arrival parking in space
i − 1 by this evidence. Thus, the BPA for “ occupied” of Space
i is set to zero. Similarly, a factor α is used to adjust the
weighting in BPA for E 2 and E3.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:25:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 7 =====

ZHU et al.: PARKING DETECTION METHOD BASED ON FINITE-STATE MACHINE AND COLLABORATIVE DECISION-MAKING 9835
3) E 3a:A st h eE 2a, the amplitude of magnetic ﬂuctuation
sensed by the other adjacent sensor in space i + 1i su s e df o r
the third evidence E 3a. The mass function can be obtained as
⎧
⎪⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪⎨
⎪⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪⎪⎩
m
3a (occupied) =
⎧
⎪⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
Mi+1
Tmin
α, 0 ≤
 Mi+1 < Tmin
Mi+1
M
α, Tmin ≤
 Mi+1 < Tmax
0,
 Mi+1 ≥ Tmax
m3a (vacant) = 1−m3a (occupied)
(6)
where
 Mi+1 is the average of pre-processed value sensed by
sensor i + 1. As the same as Eq. (5), the ratio of
 Mi+1 and
Mi is introduced as the basic probability for “ occupied” state.
4) E4a: It has been proven that the signals generated by the
same vehicle are similar. So, the cross-correlation of the signal
sensed by sensor i and that by an adjacent sensor is introduced
for the fourth evidence E 4a. The greater ﬂuctuation amplitude
between the two adjacent sensors ( i − 1a n d i + 1) is chosen
for calculating the mass function m4a, as shown in (7).
⎧
⎨
⎩
m4a (occupied) = cov(Xi, Xadj )
σXi · σXadj
· β
m4a (vacant) = 1 − m4a (occupied)
(7)
where Xi and Xadj are the feature vectors sensed by Sensor
i and the adjacent sensor respect ively. Four features including
the number of peak-value, maximum, minimum and average
value are chosen. The cov(Xi · Xadj ) is the covariance of Xi
and Xadj ,a n d σXi · σXadj is their standard deviation. Like
the α, β is a parameter used to ad just the weighting on BPA
of E4. However, the basic probability for arrival and departure
should satisfy the condition: mia (occupied)+mia (vacant) = 1
(i = 1∼4).
4) Evidences for Possible-Departure:
1) E
1d: As the same as the possible-arrival, the amplitude of
magnetic ﬂuctuation sensed by sensor i is introduced for the
ﬁrst evidence for departure detection, E 1d. The mass function
m1d can be obtained by Eq. (4).
2) E2d: The amplitude of magnetic ﬂuctuation sensed by the
adjacent sensor in space i − 1 is the second evidence E 2d.T h e
mass function m2d can be obtained by Eq. (5).
3) E3d: The amplitude of magnetic ﬂuctuation sensed by the
adjacent sensor in space i + 1 is the third evidence E 3d.T h e
mass function m3d can be obtained by Eq. (6).
4) E 4d: The arrival information has been recorded during
departure detection. Because th e ﬂuctuations recorded in the
arrival detection and the departure detection are produced
by the same vehicle. Thus, the matching-degree between
the arrival and departure signals is used as an evidence for
departure decision. The mass function m
4d can be calculated
as
⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩
m4d (occupied) = 1 −
⏐⏐
⏐
Mi −
 M
′
i
⏐⏐
⏐
max (
Mi,
 M
′
i)
m4d (vacant) = 1 − m4d (occupied )
(8)
where
 Mi and
 Mi′ are the average of ﬂuctuation-amplitudes
sensed by sensor i for arrival and departure decision respec-
tively, which are induced by the same vehicle.
Fig. 9. The magnetic sensor node for parking detection.
5) DS-CDM for Final Detection: After the BPA of each
evidence, a combination result ( P) can be obtained by Eq. (2).
The ﬁnal decision is made by (9).
Status =
{ 1, Pa (occupied) ≥ TH or Pd (vacant) < TH
0, Pa (occupied) < TH or Pd (vacant) ≥ TH
(9)
where the Pa(occupied) is the probability of vehicle arrival for
a vacant parking space. Similarly, Pd (vacant) is the probability
of a vehicle departure of a occupied parking space. The TH
is the deﬁned threshold for the ﬁnal decision.
IV . HARDWARE AND TEST PLATFORM
A. The Magnetic Sensor Node
The magnetic sensor node is installed in each parking space.
All nodes construct a WSN. The Honeywell HMC5983 is
chosen to sense the disturbance of the magnetic ﬁeld. It is
a high-resolution magneto-resistive sensor which works well
in sensing the Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld. Due to the temperature
compensated integrated magnetometer, it provides a high sen-
sitivity under wide operating temperature range. In addition,
it is in a small size (3 .0 × 3.0 × 0.9mm) LCC surface mount
package. Moreover, it has low operating voltage (2.16 to 3.6V)
and low power consumption. As shown in Fig. 9, besides
the magnetic sensor, MCU, RF module, and a battery is also
included in our sensor node.
The STM8L151C8 is an ultra-low-power MCU which sup-
ports ﬁve low-power modes to achieve the best compro-
mise between low-power consumption, short startup. Silicon
Laboratories Si4438 is a high-performance and low-power
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:25:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 8 =====

9836 IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 18, NO. 23, DECEMBER 1, 2018
Fig. 10. The test platform used in the parking lot at the SIAT.
dissipation transceiver working in a wide frequency range from
425 to 525 MHZ. Our solution provides robust communication
links due to the exceptional output power of up to +20dBm
with outstanding TX efﬁciency. In addition, the choice of
battery is important since it directly determines the lifetime
of the node.
B. The Test Platform
To evaluate the performance, a test platform, including
sensor nodes, upper system, indicator, data presentation,
and video veriﬁcation, has been built up in the under-
ground parking lot at Shenzhen Institutes Advanced Tech-
nology (SIAT), Chinese Acad emy of Sciences, as shown
in Fig. 10.
Using the test platform, our experiments were carried out.
Through WSN, the detection results are sent to base station
which is connected with upper computer system. The status
of parking space is presented on the upper system that also
displays the network information. At the same time, the color
of parking indication light is updated to remind the drivers.
In order to calculate the accuracy of the proposed method,
the data presentation system and video veriﬁcation system are
designed.
V. V
ERIFICATION
A. Parameter Setup
The parameters are listed in Table III.
TABLE III
PARAMETERS
TABLE IV
EXAMPLE OF COLLABORATED DECISION
B. An Example for Applying the Proposed Method
An example of applying MiFSM is illuminated in Fig. 11.
In the MiFSM module, four arrivals (status = 1) and four
departures (status = 0) have been correctly detected by the
sensor in Space i.H o w e v e r ,a“critical” state (status = 2)
occurs. Therefore, DS-CDM module is triggered for ﬁnal
detection. The detection result can be veriﬁed by checking
the surveillance video.
The
Mi = 79 mGS,
 Mi−1 = 21 mGS,
 Mi+1 = 6m G S ,
Xi =[ 7, 0.45, 4, 25], Xadj =[ 4, 0.15, 5, 8] for the “ critical”
state. The calculation steps are listed as follows.
(1) The
 Mi = 79 mGS, Tmin = 40 mGS, and Tmax = 80
mGS are substituted into the Eq. (4) to calculate the m1a(o)
and m1a(v). According to the parameters in Table I, m1a(o) =
0.98 and m1a(v) = 0.02 are obtained.
(2) Using Eq. (5), the
 Mi−1 = 21 is substituted into
(
Mi−1/Tmin ) ∗α, we obtain m2a(o) = 0.42 and m2a(v) =
0.58.
(3) In the same way, the
 Mi+1 = 6 is substituted into
Eq. (5), the m3a(o) = 0.12 and m3a(v) = 0.88 are obtained.
(4) The Xi =[ 7, 0.45, 4, 25], Xadj =[ 4, 0.15, 5, 8] are put
into Eq. (6), m4a(o) = 0.86 and m4a(v) = 0.14 are obtained.
(5) Based on the calculated results, the normalization con-
stant K = 2.63 can be obtained using Eq. (3).
(6) The ﬁnal results are obtained by substituting the calcu-
lated values into Eq. (2). The results are listed in Table IV .
According to Eq. (9), the “ critical” state ﬁnally reaches the
“occupied” state.
C. Veriﬁcation
The detection accuracy is eval uated by calculating the ratio
of the number of parking even ts correctly-detected and the
total number of parking events.
Accuracyj =
( CN j
TN j
)
× 100%, j = 0 or 1 (10)
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:25:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 9 =====

ZHU et al.: PARKING DETECTION METHOD BASED ON FINITE-STATE MACHINE AND COLLABORATIVE DECISION-MAKING 9837
Fig. 11. The example of MiFSM detection. The measurement of ma gnetic data for three axes and the result of states includes “ vacant” state (status = 0),
“occupied” state (status = 1), and “ critical” state (status = 2).
TABLE V
RESULTS OF COLLABORATIVE DECISION FOR POSSIBLE -ARRIVAL
where the CNj is the number of correctly detected parking
vehicles. The TNj is the total number of parking vehicles.
The j = 0 represents arrival detection and j = 1 departure
detection.
In our test, a total of 1834 vehicles have been tested
during two months by using ten magnetic sensor nodes in
the under-ground parking lot at the SIAT. The test vehicles
consist of minicars, common 4-seat sedan cars, SUV cars, and
commercial vans.
As mentioned above, most of the vehicles were correctly
detected by MiFSM. There were only 13 “ critical” states for
possible-arrival and 7 “ critical” states for possible-departure.
Besides, three out of 1834 vehicles (2 for arrival and 1 for
departure) were missed in total. Using DS-CDM in the ﬁnal
detection, all of these “ critical” states were transferred to cor-
rect decided states and the results have been listed in Table V
and VI. In the “ result” column, “1” denotes the parking
space being “occupied” and “0” denotes “vacant”. The outputs
of DS-CDM for possible-arrival and possible-departure are
shown in Fig. 12 and Fig. 13, respectively.
In Fig. 12, in the x-axis, the m
1a(o), m2a(o), m3a(o),a n d
m4a(o) are the support rate of each evidence for possible-
arrival according to Table V . They-axis represents the resultant
of support rate obtained by equation (6) for arrival decision,
described as P
a(occupied). In Fig. 13, in the x-axis, the
m1d(v), m2d(v), m3d(v),a n d m4d(v) are the support rate of
each evidence for possible-depa rture according to Table VI.
In the same way, the y-axis is the resultant of support rate for
departure decision, described as Pd (vacant).
The detection results are shown in Table VII. In the prelimi-
nary detection, the accuracy of the MiFSM reaches 98.36% for
arrival and 99.13% for departure. The accuracy of arrival and
departure are improved to 99.78% and 99.89% for departure
using the ﬁnal DS-CDM detection.
D. Discussion
Comparing with the other parking detection methods based
on magnetic sensors, because of the low computational com-
plexity of the state machine, our MiFSM has the advantage of
low energy-consumption. Beside, by using the collaborative
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:25:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 10 =====

9838 IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 18, NO. 23, DECEMBER 1, 2018
TABLE VI
RESULTS OF COLLABORATIVE DECISION FOR POSSIBLE -D EPARTURE
Fig. 12. The ﬁnal result of DS-CDM for possible-arrival.
Fig. 13. The ﬁnal result of DS- CDM for possible-departure.
information, the DS-CDM impro ves the detection accurate.
Although the computational complexity of DS-CDM is a little
higher, it runs on upper computer system. Thus, the lifetime
of sensor node can reach more than 5 years. Therefore the
proposed method achieves dual goals of high accuracy and
energy-consumption.
However, because the magnetic sensor is expensive, the cost
of this solution is relatively high. With the development of
TABLE VII
DETECTION RESULTS
sensor technology, the cost may be reduced in the future. In
addition, the sensor node is packaged and buried underground
in each parking space. The replacement of the node battery is
difﬁcult. We can only count on the low-power consumption
technology to achieve long lifetime. Moreover, the detection
accuracy needs to be further improved.
Very rarely, our system falls into a false negative or false
positive state which are caused by two situations: (1) system
malfunction (runaway). In this situation, the system should be
reset by a remote reset signal which is implemented in our
updated sensor node. According our sampled data in the past
few years, we have not observed the system malfunction (run-
away) happening. (2) algorithmic problems. In this situation,
our upper system can correct part of the mistakes. This is an
issue of detection accuracy. It does not cause to system to
halt. The system continues working for next round detection.
As for the accuracy of our system, described in Section V ,
only 3 false negatives out of 1834 tests occurred and they
have been corrected by the upper system though reset.
VI. C
ONCLUSION
In this paper, we have proposed a high accurate park-
ing occupancy detection method by using magnetic sensors.
To improve the detection accuracy, our work focuses on
dealing with the interferences from adjacent vehicles, includ-
ing moving and parking vehicles. The performance of the
proposed method, which combines MiFSM and DS-CDM
together, has been veriﬁed in the parking lot at the SIAT
(Chinese Academy of Sciences). The experimental results have
shown that our method achieves dual goals of high-accuracy
and low-power consumption. In the preliminary detection of
MiFSM, we have tested 1834 vehicles. The detection accuracy
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:25:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 11 =====

ZHU et al.: PARKING DETECTION METHOD BASED ON FINITE-STATE MACHINE AND COLLABORATIVE DECISION-MAKING 9839
reaches 98.36% for vehicle arrival and 99.13% for vehicle
departure. In the ﬁnal detection of DS-CDM, 13 “ critical”
states for arrival and 7 “ critical” states for departure are trans-
ferred to decided states by using the collaborative information
between the adjacent sensor nodes. So, the ﬁnal detection
accuracy reaches 99.8% for vehicle arrival and 99.9% for
vehicle departure.
In our future studies, we intend to extend the collabora-
tive decision-making mechanism to moving vehicle detection,
speed estimation, and vehicle cla ssiﬁcation in the application
of intelligent trafﬁc system.
A
CKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers
for their valuable comments. Th ey also sincerely appreciate
Songde Qiu, and Jun Shen for their assistance with the
experiments.
R
EFERENCES
[1] J.-H. Shin and H.-B. Jun, “A study on smart parking guidance algo-
rithm,” Transp. Res. C, Emerg. Technol., vol. 44, pp. 299–317, Jul. 2014.
[2] A. O. Kotb, Y .-C. Shen, and Y . Huang, “Smart parking guidance,
monitoring and reservations: A review,” IEEE Intell. Transp. Syst. Mag.,
vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 6–16, Apr. 2017.
[3] T. O. Olasupo, C. E. Otero, L. D. Ot ero, K. O. Olasupo, and I. Kostanic,
“Path loss models for low-power, low-data rate sensor nodes for smart
car parking systems,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. , vol. 19, no. 6,
pp. 1774–1783, Jun. 2018.
[4] S. Chakraborty, S. Chakrabor ty, S. Nandi, and S. Karmakar,
“ADCROSS: Adaptive data collection from road surveilling sensors,”
IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. , vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 2049–2062,
Oct. 2014.
[5] S. S. M. Ali, B. George, L. Vanajakshi, and J. Venkatraman, “A multiple
inductive loop vehicle detection sys tem for heterogeneous and lane-less
trafﬁc,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. , vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 1353–1360,
May 2012.
[6] Y . Jo, J. Choi, and I. Jung, “Trafﬁc information acquisition system with
ultrasonic sensors in wireless sensor networks,” Int. J. Distrib. Sensor
Netw., vol. 10, p. 961073, May 2014.
[7] S.-E. Shih and W.-H. Tsai, “A convenient vision-based system for
automatic detection of parking spaces in indoor parking lots using
wide-angle cameras,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. , vol. 63, no. 6,
pp. 2521–2532, Jul. 2014.
[8] C. Trigona et al. , “Implementation and characterization of a smart
parking system based on 3-axis magnetic sensors,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Instrum. Meas. Technol. Conf. , May 2016, pp. 1–6.
[9] V . Markevicius, D. Navikas, M. Zilys, D. Andriukaitis, A. Valinevicius,
and M. Cepenas, “Dynamic vehicle detection via the use of magnetic
ﬁeld sensors,” Sensors, vol. 16, no. 1, p. 78, Jan. 2016.
[10] S. Y . Cheung and P. Varaiya, “Trafﬁc surveillance by wireless sensor
networks: Final report,” Inst. Transp. Stud., Univ. California, Berkeley,
Berkeley, CA, USA, Tech. Rep. UCB-ITS-PRR-2007-4, Jan. 2007.
[11] B. Yang and W. Ni, “Vehicle detection and classiﬁcation algorithm based
on anisotropic magnetoresistive sensor,” C h i n .J .S c i .I n s t r u m ., vol. 34,
no. 3, pp. 537–544, 2013.
[12] B. Yang and Y . Lei, “Vehicle detection and classiﬁcation for low-
speed congested trafﬁc with anisotropic magnetoresistive sensor,” IEEE
Sensors J., vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 1132–1138, Feb. 2015.
[13] S. Taghvaeeyan and R. Rajamani, “Po rtable roadside sensors for vehicle
counting, classiﬁcation, and speed measurement,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
Transp. Syst., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 73–83, Feb. 2014.
[14] X. Bao, H. Li, D. Xu, L. Jia, B. Ran, and J. Rong, “Trafﬁc vehicle
counting in jam ﬂow conditions using low-cost and energy-efﬁcient
wireless magnetic sensors,” Sensors, vol. 16, no. 11, p. 1868, 2016.
[15] Q. Wei and B. Yang, “Adaptable vehicle detection and speed estimation
for changeable urban trafﬁc with anisotropic magnetoresistive sensors,”
IEEE Sensors J. , vol. 17, no. 7, pp. 2021–2028, Apr. 2017.
[16] Q. Wang, J. Zheng, H. Xu, B. Xu, and R. Chen, “Roadside magnetic
sensor system for vehicle detection in urban environments,” IEEE Trans.
Intell. Transp. Syst. , vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 1365–1374, May 2018.
[17] R. Wang, L. Zhang, R. Sun, J. Gong, and L. Cui, “EasiTia: A per-
vasive trafﬁc information acquisition system based on wireless sensor
networks,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 615–621,
Jun. 2011.
[18] H. Zhu and F. Yu, “A cross-correla tion technique for vehicle detections
in wireless magnetic sensor network,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 16, no. 11,
pp. 4484–4494, Jun. 2016.
[19] Z. Zhang, J. Deng, T. Zhao, and H. Yuan, “A fusion algorithm for vehicle
detection based on waveform similarity,”Chin. J. Sens. Actuators,v o l .3 ,
no. 1004-1699, p. 14, Mar. 2018.
[20] Z. Zhang, M. Tao, and H. Yuan, “A parking occupancy detection
algorithm based on AMR sensor,” IEEE Sensors J. , vol. 15, no. 2,
pp. 1261–1269, Feb. 2015.
[21] W. Jian and X. Bin, “Design and veriﬁcation of parking space detection
based on AMR sensor,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Transp. Inf. Saf. ,
Aug. 2017, pp. 968–973.
[22] E. Sifuentes, O. Casas, and R. Pallas-Areny, “Wireless magnetic sensor
node for vehicle detection with optical wake-up,” IEEE Sensors J. ,
vol. 11, no. 8, pp. 1669–1676, Aug. 2011.
[23] R. Wang, L. Zhang, K. Xiao, R. Sun, and L. Cui, “EasiSee: Real-time
vehicle classiﬁcation and counting via low-cost collaborative sensing,”
IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 414–424, Feb. 2014.
[24] F. Garcia, D. Martin, A. de la Escalera, and J. M. Armingol, “Sensor
fusion methodology for vehicle detection,” IEEE Intell. Transp. Syst.
Mag., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 123–133, Jan. 2017.
[25] F. Li and Z. Lv, “Reliable vehicle type recognition based on information
fusion in multiple sensor networks,” Comput. Netw., vol. 117, pp. 76–84,
Apr. 2017.
[26] C. Cuevas, R. Martinez, D. Berjón, and N. Garcia, “Detection of
stationary foreground objects using multiple nonparametric background-
foreground models on a ﬁnite state machine,” IEEE Trans. Image
Process., vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 1127–1142, Mar. 2017.
[27] A. P. Dempster, “Upper and lower probabilities induced by a multivalued
mapping,” Ann. Math. Statist. , vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 325–339, 1967.
[28] Z. Jiao, H. Gong, and Y . Wang, “A D-S evidence theory-based relay
protection system hidden failures detection method in smart grid,” IEEE
Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 2118–2126, May 2018.
Hongmei Zhu received the B.S. degree in elec-
tronics and information e ngineering from Central
China Normal University in 2005, the M.S. degree
in communication and information systems from the
Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
Hubei, China, in 2010, and the Ph.D. degree in
pattern recognition and intelligent system with the
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China,
in 2016. In 2016, she joined the Shenzhen Institutes
of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sci-
ences, in a post-doctoral position. Her research inter-
ests include intelligent transportation systems and wireless sensor networks.
Shengzhong Feng received the Ph.D. degree from
the Beijing Institute of Technology, China. Since
1997, he has been with the Research Centre for
High Performance Computing, Institute of Advanced
Computing and Digital Engineering, Shenzhen Insti-
tutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, as a Professor. From 2005 to 2007,
he was with the University of Toronto, Canada,
as a Visiting Scholar. His research interests include
high performance computing, network computing,
and information biology.
Fengqi Yu received the Ph.D. degree in integrated
circuit and system from the University of California
at Los Angeles, USA. He worked in the U.S. indus-
try for ten years. He joined the Shenzhen Institutes
of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sci-
ences, in 2006, where he is currently a Professor. His
research interests include wireless sensor networks
and integrated circuits and systems.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:25:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 