

===== PAGE 1 =====

Toward an Easy Deployable Outdoor Parking
System – Lessons from Long-term Deployment
Y u Huang∗, Yi-Chao Chen †, Chuang-Wen Y ou∗, Dian-Xuan Wu ∗,‡, Yi-Ling Chen ∗, Kai-Lung Hua ‡,
Jane Y ung-Jen Hsu∗
∗National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
Email: {b02902084, cwyou }@ntu.edu.tw, yiling@arbor.ee.ntu.edu.tw, yjhsu@csie.n tu.edu.tw
†Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
Email: yichao@cs.utexas.edu
‡National Taiwan University of Science & Technology, Taipei , Taiwan
Email: {m10315014, hua }@mail.ntust.edu.tw
Abstract—Data pertaining to the availability of parking slots
is crucial to the efﬁcient operation of systems designed to
monitor the state of parking spaces. Outdoor parking systems
have been developed using wireless sensors, Internet of Things
(IoT) technology, and cameras. Unfortunately, interference f rom
electromagnetic ﬁelds complicates the tuning of parameters for
detection algorithms and limits accuracy to only 90 percent. In
this study, we investigated these problems by collecting data from
magnetic sensors, light sensors, and LoRa wireless modules used
in the detection transient events (car arrivals and departures)
over a period of 13 months. This led to the design an adaptive
occupancy detection system using a variety of sensors, which can
be deployed with only minimal calibration.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Data pertaining to the availability of parking slots is cruc ial
to the efﬁcient locating of empty parking spaces [1]. Exist-
ing outdoor parking systems are based on wireless sensors,
Internet of Things (IoT) technology [12], and cameras [24].
IoT-based systems developed by Streetline Inc. [17] and in t he
SFpark project [14] have been deployed in North America and
European cities. However, interference from electromagne tic
ﬁelds [12] causes frequent false positives; i.e., degraded accu-
racy. Discussions with experts in IoT technology revealed t hat
magnetic sensors are prone to false detections when deploye d
as parking nodes. Thus, systems tend to be retrained only in
response to complaints from customers or within a schedule
wherein updates are conducted more frequently than necessa ry.
Most existing parking solutions dealing with parking oc-
cupancy rely on magnetic sensors to identify the arrival
and/or departure of vehicles. Current state-of-the-art pa rking
solutions, such as FastPrk [5] and Fastprk2 [20] are reporte d
to provide accuracy of 95% [6] ∼ 98% [7]; however, these
estimates are based on short-term data collection often wit hin a
laboratory environment [6], [13]. Furthermore, administr ators
replaced a FastPrk system deployed in Moscow with another
system after the initial trials [15], citing shortcomings i n the
system. The three main challenges in the design of parking
solutions based on magnetic devices are (1) environmental
changes, (2) the spatial characteristics of individual par king
slots, and (3) time-varying factors, such as variations in t he
geomagnetic ﬁeld or dwindling battery life. Maintaining th e
accuracy of such systems requires that the model be retraine d;
however, existing systems lack a mechanism by which to alert
operators when retraining is required. Thus, we conducted a n
empirical study to identify challenges and limitations in t he use
of magnetic, light-based, and LoRa wireless modules for the
detection of transient events (including events of car arrivals
and departures) in a real-world environment. Long-term mul ti-
slot deployment was conducted to reveal weaknesses in curre nt
learning-based parking systems. To the best of our knowledg e,
previous reports on these systems employed learning-based
methods, and none of them discussed system performance
over extended durations or in different locations. Our long -
term assessment of sensors in multiple parking spaces revea led
the need for an adaptive occupancy detection algorithm to
complement current state-of-the-art parking solutions.
In this study, we explored the challenges and limitation to
understand the potential design considerations of designi ng
easy-deployable and manageable IoT-based parking systems .
Through collecting and analyzing the 13-month data collect ed
from magnetic sensing, light sensing, and LoRa wireless
modules, we propose a feasible adaptive design to enable
easy-deployable parking solutions. The goal of this paper i s to
highlight the need of adaptive machine learning schemes whe n
designing parking occupancy detection system to encourage
major outdoor parking solution providers continuing to ena ble
future easy-deployable solutions.
The contributions of this study are three-fold. First, we
elucidated the strengths and weaknesses of three major sens -
ing modalities in real-world scenarios. Second, to overcom e
imprecision in the collected data, we developed three adapt ive
machine learning schemes: model selection, sensor selecti on,
and failure detection. These machine learning schemes led t o
the development of an adaptive occupancy detection system
using three types of sensors in order to eliminate the need fo r
major calibration. Third, we conducted a series of evaluati ons
using a variety of metrics (accuracy, precision, recall, an d F1-
score) to validate the performance of the proposed adaptive
machine learning schemes in the detection of transient even ts.

===== PAGE 2 =====

>ŽZĂ ^ĞŶĚĞƌηϮ 
>ŽZĂ ^ĞŶĚĞƌηϭ 
WĂƌŬŝŶŐĂƌĞĂ 
;ĂͿĞƉůŽǇĞĚ>ŽZĂ ^ĞŶĚĞƌƐ 
ĂŶĚƐĞůĞĐƚĞĚƉĂƌŬŝŶŐĂƌĞĂ 
;ďͿƵƐƚŽŵŝǌĞĚďŽĂƌĚ 
;ĐͿƉĂƌŬŝŶŐŶŽĚĞŝŶĂƐůŽƚ 
DĂŐŶĞƚŝĐƐĞŶƐŽƌ 
ĂƚƚĞƌǇ 
D^WϰϯϬ 
>ŽZĂ ŵŽĚƵůĞ DŝĐƌŽ^ 
>ŝŐŚƚƐĞŶƐŽƌ 
Fig. 1: LoRa sensors and proposed parking nodes. In (a),
only Sender #1 (2nd ﬂoor of the building: top) and Sender
#2 (2nd ﬂoor of another building: bottom) are presented. In
(c), the node is half-buried in the center of the slot.
II. R ELATED WORK
Existing smart parking solutions for outdoor environments
[17], [14], [22], [5] use magnetic sensors to identify the ar rival
or departure of cars. In [30], researchers of the pilot SFpar k
project listed car models and environmental interference a s
challenges in the use of magnetic sensors to detect vehicle
arrivals and departures. Streetline [17] uses camera senso rs in
conjunction with or in lieu of in-ground magnetic sensors to
reduce the effects of electrical interference [16]. Unfort unately,
this approach is limited to line-of-sight scenarios and is
susceptible to changes in lighting conditions, thereby nec essi-
tating the deployment of a large number of cameras. ADEC
technologies [2] recently announced a parking occupancy
detector that incorporates additional sensors; however, t hey
have released no details of the proposed system. The inclusi on
of additional sensors no doubt improves detection accuracy ;
however, it greatly increases power consumption and capita l
overhead. Worldsensing [23] recently incorporated server -side
service layers in the development of a new generation parkin g
system (i.e., Fastprk-2 [20]). This system is based on the
occupancy sensors used in the Fastprk system in conjunction
with advanced signal processing algorithms for the detecti on
of occupancy using information obtained via data mining. It
is reported to have accuracy of 95% ∼ 98%; however, these
results are based on short-term evaluations under laborato ry
conditions [15].
Researchers have used a variety of alternative sensing
techniques, such as passive acoustic array sensors, passiv e
infrared sensor, RFID, ultrasonic and video image processi ng
[26], [28], [29]. Unfortunately, some of these devises (e.g .,
RFID, ultrasonic signals, or visual signals) require expen sive
overhead installations and on-going maintenance. The fact that
most situations preclude the installation of overhead devi ces
has led to the development of inductive loops, piezoelectri c
cables, and weigh-in-motion sensors [26]. This commonly
requires the cutting of pavement for installation and neces si-
tates the use of multiple detectors. Other solutions involv e the
Module Average current Sampling energy (time)
System Low-power: 22.06uA
Active: 5.54mA -
Magnetic 2.40mA 12.68mJ (1.6ms)
LoRa Receiving: 35.88mA
Sending: 76.00mA
Receiving: 1.78J (15ms)
Sending: 3.16J (12.6ms)
Light 3.75mA 745.63mJ (250ms)
TABLE I: Average current and energy drawn by the system,
magnetic sensing, LoRa wireless, and light sensing module.
detection of signals reﬂected from vehicles (e.g., microwa ve
radar or ultrasonic ranging sensors); however, this approa ch
greatly increases power consumption and the such systems
are highly susceptible to environmental interference.
ParkNet [28] uses an ultrasonic rangeﬁnder to detect parkin g
spot occupancy. Each location is associated with GPS coor-
dinates, thereby making it possible to pinpoint the locatio n
of each car and generate an occupancy map of the entire
city. ParkSense [29] infers unparking events by observing
changes in the Wi-Fi signatures from the mobile phones
of drivers. Unfortunately, these crowd-sourcing approach es
require participation by a substantial proportion of drive rs and
are generally less reliable than other methods.
III. E XPERIMENT : L ONG -TERM DATA COLLECTION
Our aim was to identify the factors that affect accuracy
in determining the occupancy of parking spaces. Long-term
readings were obtained from magnetic sensors and other low-
cost devices.
A. Experimental Setup
Customized parking nodes were deployed in four adjacent
parking lots on the campus of National Taiwan University
(Fig. 1(a)). To ensure easy deployment and maintenance, we
opted for the single-point deployment of low-cost, low-pow er
sensors for the detection of transient events. The parking n odes
were housed in a rectangular water-proof case containing a
circuit board powered by four Lithium-ion batteries.
As shown in Fig. 1(b), each circuit board was equipped with
a low-power TI MSP430 microcontroller [21], a Honeywell
HMC5883 3-axis compass sensor [9], a TSL2561 light-to-
digital converter [19], and an ARCT TM1276 LoRa transceiver
module [4]. Table I lists the average current and energy
consumption of the bare system and sensing modules. The
magnetic sensors and light sensors consume far less energy
(12.68 and 745.63 milli-joules) than do the LoRa wireless
modules (3.16 joules for sending and 1.78 joules for receivi ng
a 4-byte packet). Each parking node was placed in the center
of the parking lot to reduce interference from vehicles in
adjacent lots. Note that numerous low-cost sensing alterna tives
are available; however, we selected a combination of sensor s
(i.e., a magnetic sensor, a light sensor, and the wireless Lo Ra
modules) to demonstrate the application of a sensor selecti on
algorithm to achieve a trade-off between high accuracy and
low power consumption. In the event that other sensors are
used in the parking nodes, it should be possible for the

===== PAGE 3 =====

same sensor selection algorithm to switch between any new
combination of sensors.
A surveillance camera was mounted on an outside wall on
the 7th ﬂoor of a nearby building to monitor the parking area.
This data was used as ground-truth information pertaining
to parking events. All recorded footage was streamed back
to a server via a wired link and stored. We envision that
a few internet-connected gateways (IoT gateways) could be
scattered throughout the city in the future, thereby ensuri ng
reliability in the relaying of data to a central network serv er. To
emulate this situation, we installed a number of IoT gateway s
around the selected parking area to enable the exchange of
messages between nodes and the backend. Three LoRa senders
deployed in two buildings surrounding the area broadcast
messages every 500ms to be received by LoRa modules on
the parking nodes. LoRa Senders #1 and #2 were located on
the 2nd ﬂoor of the two building 15 meters from the closest
parking node to emulate gateways deployed in positions at th e
same height as street lights. LoRa Sender #3 was located on
the 5th ﬂoor of a building at a distance of 40 meters from
the closest parking node. All readings from the sensing and
communications modules were recorded on an on-board micro
SD card and then manually retrieved via a serial interface
every two days
B. Characterizing Transient Events
Between April 2015 and April 2016, we collected 7175
hours of parking data involving 1276 transient events; i.e. ,
666 arrivals and 610 departures for an average of 51 arrival
events and 46 departure events per month. The MSP430 micro-
controller sampled readings from magnetic sensors and ligh t
sensors. RSSI values in the header of LoRa packets achieved
a best-effort sampling rate of 250 ms per second. This was
limited by the intensity of the light received by the sensor
[19]. Each transient event was associated with changes in th e
patterns read from magnetic sensors, light sensors, and LoR a
wireless modules.
Magnetic sensor : Magnet-based detection methods can be
used identify parking events by responding to changes in the
patterns of signals. Typically, changes in the magnetic ﬁel d
can be attributed to the movement of a car and the engine
being shut on/off. The large amount of ferrous materials in a
car body means that changes in the magnetic ﬁeld are easily
affected by vehicles entering or leaving, but also by nearby
cars [3]. In obtaining samples, the sensor decomposes the
Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld and outputs individual components ov er
the x, y, and z axes relative to the local coordinate frame of a
compass. Combining the individual components into a vector
makes it possible to obtain an aggregate vector.
Light sensor : Changes in the intensity of incident light at
parking nodes makes it possible to infer the departure or arr ival
of a car. This study used a wide light spectrum containing
visible and infrared light, using digital output signals be tween
0 ∼ 65535 from the broadband channel of a TSL2561 [19].
Placement of a light sensor in the center of a slot would mean
that is intermittently covered by cars entering or leaving t he
EŽŶͲŶĞŐůŝŐŝďůĞĚƌŽƉ 
;ĂͿWĂƌŬŝŶŐŝŶĂƐůŽƚĚƵƌŝŶŐϬΕϭϱƐ 
;ďͿWĂƌŬŝŶŐŝŶĂŶĂĚũĂĐĞŶƚƐůŽƚĚƵƌŝŶŐϱΕϭϴƐ 
Fig. 2: Readings collected from a magnetic sensor along the
z axis in two scenarios.
slot. As indicated by the red line in Fig. 3, the digital outpu t
decreased by more than 30000 when a car parked at 47 s.
LoRa module : When a parking node is deployed in the
center of a parking slot, the transmission path between sur-
rounding LoRa senders and the parking node is blocked by
passing cars, resulting in the attenuation of the received s ignal
strength (RSSI). Thus, the passage of cars can be interprete d
as transient events. Fig. 4(a) shows RSSI values received by
LoRa Sender #1 at a distance of 15 meters, when the parking
slot is occupied, empty, or soon to be occupied by a car (e.g.
the 12 dBm difference in signal strength at 50s).
Characterization of changes in the patterns collected from
the sensors began with a moving average pre-processing step
to ﬁlter out corrupted samples. We then extracted feature
segments using a sliding window (empirical-determined 15-
second duration, with 50% overlap). The presence of a car is
determined through the extraction of statistical features (mean,
median, mode, and range). Our aim was to express the central
tendency and statistical dispersion of the magnetic ﬁeld, l ight
intensity, and RSSI values as well as all derivatives of the
individual components (or aggregated vectors) within a dat a
segment. This included a total of 108 magnetic features, 30
light features, and 90 LoRa features (i.e., 30 LoRa features
for each sender). Based on these features, the proposed syst em
adaptively selects a sub-optimal set of features as an indic ation
of a transient event, as described in Section V -C.
IV. I NITIAL OBSERVATIONS : C HALLENGES AND
LIMITATIONS OF EACH SENSING MODALITY
An easy-deployable parking system should provide 24/7
operational coverage and enable the accurate detection of a
range of vehicle models. The long-term data set described
in Section III made it possible to identify factors capable o f
interfering with sensor readings: (1) environmental facto rs, (2)
deployment factors, and (3) target-vehicle factors.
A. Interference Cases Caused by Environmental Factors
Environmental factors, such as weather conditions or nearb y
vehicles, can affect magnetic sensors, light sensors, and L oRa
wireless modules.

===== PAGE 4 =====

Ͱ
;ĂͿ/ŶƚĞƌŵŝƚƚĞŶƚůĞĂĨďůŽĐŬŝŶŐĚƵƌŝŶŐϯϵϬ 
ΕϰϬϬƐĂŶĚϰϭϴΕϰϯϱƐ 
;ĂͿ/ŶƚĞŶƐŝƚǇĐŚĂŶŐĞƐĚƵĞƚŽƉĂƌŬŝŶŐ;ƌĞĚͿ 
ĂŶĚŵŽǀŝŶŐĐůŽƵĚďůŽĐŬŝŶŐ;ďůƵĞůŝŶĞͿ 
Fig. 3: Readings collected from light sensors when a car was
parking in a slot (the red line in (a) and (b)), in which
sunlight is gradually blocked by slow-moving clouds (the
blue line in (a)), and intermittently blocked by leaves
moving in a nearby tree (the red line in (b)).
1) Magnetic sensor: The earth’s magnetic ﬁeld varies with
location and over time. It is also inﬂuenced by nearby ferrou s-
metal objects (e.g., bicycles or adjacent vehicles) [3]. Th e
impact on the magnetic ﬁeld varies according to the amount
of ferrous metal in vehicles and the distance from the parkin g
node. Fig. 2(b) illustrates the effects of interference fro m a car
parking in an adjacent slot. Changes in measurements along
the z-axis are non-negligible, which means that they could be
interpreted as a non-normal transient event (Fig. 2(a)).
2) Light sensor: Outdoor lighting conditions are highly
variable. The arrival and departure of cars during the day ca n
result in dramatic changes in lighting intensity over a very brief
period, as shown by the blue line in Fig. 3(a). As the sun moves
across the sky, the light can also be blocked by stationary
objects. Readings collected by light sensors when a car was
parking in a slot (the red line in Fig. 3(a)), show how sunligh t
was blocked by slow-moving clouds (the blue line in Fig. 3(a) ),
or intermittently blocked by leaves moving in a nearby tree
(the red line in 3(b)). Observations of previous detection f ailure
demonstrate that existing methods often produce patterns t hat
do not necessarily correspond to an actual parking event.
3) LoRa module: Due to multipath effects in the transmis-
sion of radio signals, any objects (e.g., nearby humans or ca rs)
within a given environment can have an impact on the received
signal strength of LoRa modules. The degree to which RSSI
is altered by vehicles passing nearby (red cross in Fig. 4(b) )
tends to be less pronounced than that caused by the arrival or
departure of cars to/from the target slot (blue circles in Fi g.
4(b)). Conversely, the degree to which RSSI is altered by the
arrival or departure of target vehicles increases with a hig her
baseline RSSI (deﬁned as the RSSI measured by a parking
node that is not covered by vehicles in the target slot).
Fig. 4(b) shows that the change in RSSI caused by the
arrival or departure of a car is more pronounced than that
caused by the arrival or departure of cars in nearby slots whe n
the baseline RSSI exceeds -90dBm. This is an indication that
RSSI data could be used to indicate the occurrence of transie nt
events. The presence of human or other environmental object s
can also affect the received signal strength. The degree to
which RSSI changes is determined by the size and location
&DULQ 
;ĂͿZ^^/ŝŶƉĂĐŬĞƚƐƐĞŶƚĨƌŽŵ>ŽZĂ ^ĞŶĚĞƌƐ 
ηϭĂŶĚηϮ ;ďͿĂƐĞůŝŶĞZ^^/ǀƐ͘Z^^/ĐŚĂŶŐĞ 
Fig. 4: V alues of RSSI in packets collected by LoRa
modules in a parking node deployed in a target slot under
the following scenarios: (a) RSSI in packets sent by Sender
#1 when the slot was empty (green line), occupied (blue
line), or initially empty and later occupied (red line), and
RSSI in packets sent by Sender #2 when the slot was empty
(dotted green line) or occupied (dotted blue line). (b)
Baseline RSSI vs. change in RSSI of a packet sent from
senders caused by target vehicles or nearby vehicles.
of objects, and this commonly leads to false detections. Thi s
means that a sensor selection algorithm is required to avoid
the effects of unreliable sensing readings, as outlined in t he
following section.
B. Interference Caused by Deployment Factors
The re-deployment of the parking nodes every two days led
to slight variations in the orientation of the sensors, and t hese
effects were particularly pronounced when the devices were
placed in a new parking area.
1) Magnetic sensor: Slight differences in the orientation of
a parking node produces small changes in the magnetic ﬁeld
projected onto individual components (i.e., x, y, and z axes of
a compass local coordinate frame). Local changes in the loca l
environment (e.g., nearby bicycles or parked cars) or globa l
shifts in the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld can also alter the readin gs.
A review of the raw data from each deployment revealed slight
variations in the baseline magnetic ﬁeld readings (i.e., th e
magnetic ﬁeld changed when the slot was empty).
2) Light sensor: The light sensors were housed behind a
transparent acrylic window to protect the parking nodes fro m
water. Unfortunately, the effects of morning dew or dust on t he
window altered the transmittance of light. When transmittan ce
dropped considerably, the intensity of light reaching the s ensor
was insufﬁcient to differentiate transient from non-trans ient
events.
3) LoRa module: A dipole antenna (as shown in Fig.
1(b)) was placed on the Lora module of the parking node
to transmit/receive signals. Unfortunately, slight varia tions in
the orientation of nodes resulted in different baseline RSS I
values. Even when we used an omni-directional patch antenna
[18], the location and orientation of the antenna on LoRa
senders (i.e., LoRa gateways) tended to alter the transmiss ion
of signals between senders and parking nodes, which had
a subsequent impact on the RSSI received by the parking
nodes. Fig. 4(a) shows RSSI values received by Sender #1
and Sender #3, which were respectively deployed 15 or 40

===== PAGE 5 =====

ĞƉĂƌƚƵƌĞ ĞƉĂƌƚƵƌĞ 
;ďͿŶŐŝŶĞŽƉĞƌĂƚŝŶŐǁŚĞŶĂĐĂƌŝƐ 
ƐƚĂƚŝŽŶĂƌǇŝŶƚŚĞƐůŽƚĚƵƌŝŶŐϮϬΕϱϮƐ 
;ĂͿŶŐŝŶĞŽƉĞƌĂƚŝŶŐǁŚĞŶĂĐĂƌŝƐ 
ƐƚĂƚŝŽŶĂƌǇŝŶƚŚĞƐůŽƚĚƵƌŝŶŐϮϬΕϰϴƐ 
Fig. 5: Readings collected from a magnetic sensor along the
z axis: Two engine-operating scenarios with cars stationary
in a slot.
meters from the parking slot. The difference in RSSI values
received by Sender #1 between occupied and empty states was
approximately 12 dBm. However, deploying the gateway at a
greater distance reduced the difference in signals, as indi cated
by the two dotted lines at the bottom of Fig. 4(a). In all
such situations, the RSSI values was scattered across a wide r
range. In this situation, differentiating between parking and
non-parking events could only be achieved when the baseline
RSSI value (i.e., the average RSSI value received by a node
in an empty lot) exceeded -80dBm.
To elucidate the impact of interference caused by deploy-
ment factors, we reviewed the distribution of long-term dat a. In
Section IV -D, we also propose solutions to reduce the impact
of these effects.
C. Interference Caused by Target-vehicle Factors
V ariations in the components used in the manufacture of ve-
hicles can have a profound impact on readings from magnetic
sensors and LoRa wireless modules.
1) Magnetic sensor: Changes in the magnetic ﬁeld caused
by the arrival and departure of cars varies with the design of
the vehicle. Fig. 5(a) and (b) present data along the z axis
collected for two Lexus CT 200H while idling, respectively.
The magnetic ﬁeld generated by the electric motors caused
ﬂuctuations in the readings along each of the axes when the
vehicles were switched off. We also observed a jump in the
readings when the cars left the parking slot. Nonetheless,
the readings revealed a number of similarities indicating t he
need to collect additional data from a variety of vehicles in
order to identify abnormal ﬂuctuations caused by electrica l
components.
2) LoRa module: The bodies of cars with a low-slung
design are closer to the parking node, which means that
they are more effective in blocking the signals. Furthermor e,
vehicles with a greater proportion of ferrous materials blo ck
signals far more effectively than do vehicles with a greater
content of other materials, such as aluminum. Cars inducing
only a small drop in the RSSI value can confuse the system,
thereby necessitating a sensor selection algorithm to avoi d
unreliable sensing readings.
D. Data Accuracy over the Long-term
Time
 0
 0.01
 0.02
 0.03
 0.04
 0.05
 0.06
 0.07
 50  60  70  80  90  100  110  120
PDF
Feature Value
201504
201512
201601
201604
(a) FeatureA
 0
 0.02
 0.04
 0.06
 0.08
 0.1
 0.12
 60  70  80  90  100  110  120
PDF
Feature Value
201504
201512
201601
201604
(b) FeatureB
Fig. 6: Distribution of two features collected in different
months.
 0
 0.01
 0.02
 0.03
 0.04
 0.05
 0.06
 0.07
 50  60  70  80  90  100  110  120
PDF
Feature Value
spot1
spot2
spot3
spot4
(a) FeatureA
 0
 0.001
 0.002
 0.003
 0.004
-800 -500 -200  100  400  700  1000
PDF
Feature Value
spot1
spot2
spot3
spot4
(b) FeatureB
Fig. 7: Distribution of two features collected from differe nt
parking slots.
Fig. 6 illustrates the distribution of two features collect ed
in different months. We can see similarities between the
values of Feature A at 2015.12 and 2016.01 and considerable
ﬂuctuations in the other two months. The ﬂuctuations in
Feature B are less pronounced.
Space
Fig. 7 presents the distribution of two features in the
same month but different parking slots, in which similariti es
were observed in some feature distributions and difference s
were observed in others. Any difference in data distributio n
can confuse classiﬁers and thereby undermine prediction
accuracy. In this situation, increasing the size of trainin g
data set would not necessarily improve classiﬁcation accur acy.
In the data collected over a period of 13 months, we
observed that a few of the features presented consistent
distributions across space and time. Researchers [31] have
shown that any difference in data distribution can confuse
classiﬁers and thereby undermine prediction accuracy. In t his
situation, increasing the size of training data set would no t
necessarily improve classiﬁcation accuracy. This conclus ion
is further validated in Section VI.
Instead of simply measuring changes in magnitude, the
system must learn to discern changes in the patterns associa ted
with actual transient events. The results obtained in the pi lot
phase of data collection were used to guide the subsequent
design of the system, as outlined in the following.
V. M ETHODOLOGY
We propose three schemes to handle uncertainty in the
collection of data: model selection, sensor selection, and
failure detection. Model selection refers to the identiﬁcation

===== PAGE 6 =====

of the most appropriate model (i.e., with feature distribut ion
similar to the testing data). Failure detection is used to monitor
changes in the distribution of incoming data in order to
respond in a timely manner. In the event that a failure is
detected, the system will select another suitable trained m odel
to keep providing prediction with high accuracy. Otherwise ,
the selected model outputs classiﬁcation results as well as a
corresponding conﬁdence interval. During sensor selection ,
the conﬁdence value is taken into consideration to facilita te
optimization of the system for classiﬁcation accuracy and
minimal power consumption through the switching on/off of
sensors.
A. Model Selection
Despite advances in machine learning technology, there
remain considerable challenges in the application of these
tools to real-world systems. For example, large shifts in
feature distribution can cause even a well-trained model to
fail, regardless of the machine learning technology that is
employed. In this section, we present a model selection sche me
to address this problem.
The model selection problem is deﬁned as follows: Given a
set of trained models or a set of training data with a number
of features, it is necessary to select the model or subset of
features best suited to the classiﬁcation of incoming testi ng
data.
We begin with the collection of sensor data from a variety
of parking lots at various times (with ground truth parking
events labeled), for use in training a model for the newly
deployed system. The fact that data collected from differen t
spots at different times may differ from the data obtained at
new parking lots makes it difﬁcult to select a subset of data
and features capable of maximizing detection accuracy.
The class of testing data is unknown at the time of pre-
diction, which means that we need unsupervised methods to
detect drifts in the predictions; however, it is not always c lear
what type of distribution these features obey. We adopted th ree
tests to reveal shifts in feature distribution: the Kruskal -Wallis
test [11], the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test [10], and Hellinger
distance [8].
Kruskal-Wallis (KW) test : KW one-way analysis of variance
by rank is a non-parametric method for testing the equality
of population medians among groups. It is not based on
any assumptions regarding similarities in population vari ables
among the groups being compared. This test calculates the
following statistic:
KW = (N − 1)
∑g
i=1 ni( ¯ri − ¯r)2
∑g
i=1
∑ni
j=1(rij − ¯r)2 (1)
where N is the total number of samples across classes, ni is
the number of samples of class i, rij is the rank of sample i
in class j, ¯ri is the average rank of samples in class i, and
¯r is the average of all ranks. Calculating the KW distance
of feature distributions from the trained model and the test ing
data makes it possible to select a trained model with minimal
KW distance.
Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) test : The KS test determines
whether there is divergence between two underlying one-
dimensional probability distributions. As with the KW test ,
KS makes no assumptions with regard to the distribution of
data. The two-sample KS test calculates the following stati stic:
KS = max|ST 1 − ST 2| (2)
where ST is the CDF of the samples during period T . A
smaller KS means that feature distributions from the trained
model and the testing data are more similar
Hellinger distance : Hellinger distance, also referred to as
Bhattacharyya Distance, is a measure of distributional di-
vergence. In [27], it was concluded that Hellinger distance
offers a good compromise between linearity and resolution
for linear ordination. The Hellinger distance has been used
for clustering and ordination in species abundance data. Th e
Hellinger distance calculates the following statistic:
H = 1
√
2 ||
√
PT 1 −
√
PT 2||2 (3)
where PT is the PDF of the samples during period T , and
|| · ||2 is used to calculate the two-norm.
Score of features: Based on statistical tests used to quantify
the amount of drift in the distributions, we propose six scor ing
schemes to enable an explicit estimate of the goodness-of-ﬁ t
between the trained models/features and the testing data. S cor-
ing is based on the principle that a model/feature is preferr ed
if it i) has feature distributions similar to the testing dat a,
and ii) transient and non-transient events have distributi ons
sufﬁciently distinct that machine learning tools can guara ntee a
small degree of variance in classiﬁcation error [25]. There fore,
we deﬁne the following scores as follows:
Score KW f
stable = 1
KW (P f
T 1, P f
T 2)
(4)
Score KW f
comb =
KW (P f
T 1|+, P f
T 1|−) + KW (P f
T 2|+, P f
T 2|−)
KW (P f
T 1, P f
T 2)
(5)
where Score KW f
stable stable is a score deﬁned using the
KW test, indicating that feature f presents similar distribution
across the training data and testing data. Score KW f
comb
further evaluates feature f by checking the clarity of the
distribution of transient events (i.e., P f
T 1|+) and non-transient
events (i.e., P f
T 1|−).
Similarly, we deﬁne the following scores based on KS test
and Hellinger distance:
Score KS f
stable = 1
KS (Sf
T 1, Sf
T 2)
(6)
Score KS f
comb =
KS (Sf
T 1|+, Sf
T 1|−) + KS (Sf
T 2|+, Sf
T 2|−)
KS (Sf
T 1, Sf
T 2)
(7)

===== PAGE 7 =====

 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Feb Mar Apr
Accuracy/F1-Score
Test Month
Accuracy F1-Score
(a) Cross-validation in one
month
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr
F1-Score
Test Month
15.4 15.7 15.10 16.03
(b) Cross-validation in one
month and tests in all other
months
Fig. 8: (a) Application of ten-fold cross validation illust rating
the accuracy and F1-score when training and testing data
were obtained in the same month; (b) Cross-validation in
one month and testing in other months.
Score
H f
stable = 1
H(P f
T 1, P f
T 2)
(8)
Score H f
comb =
H(P f
T 1|+, P f
T 1|−) + H(P f
T 2|+, P f
T 2|−)
H(P f
T 1, P f
T 2)
(9)
Score f
stable indicates that feature f is stable across two periods
of time T 1 and T 2.
B. Failure Detection
We also need a method by which to determine whether
feature distributions have changed sufﬁciently to necessi tate
the selection of another trained model.
This can be achieved by periodically conducting the KW,
KS, or Hellinger tests and checking whether the correspondi ng
null hypothesis is rejected. The fact that the sensors perfo rm
sampling at 4Hz or higher means that it is easy obtain
a sufﬁcient number of samples to perform the tests. We
determined that a given feature distribution could be expec ted
to remain unchanged for weeks at a time and that only 18 hours
are required to collect enough data to conduct statisticall y
meaningful tests.
C. Sensor Selection
A large number of sensors can facilitate the detection of
transient events; however, the number of sensors must be
minimized to save power, extend the lifespan of sensors, and
reduce management costs.
The proposed sensor selection scheme seeks an equable
trade-off between higher accuracy and lower power consump-
tion. Sensors are turned on and off according to observed
environmental factors with the aim of achieving the followi ng
objective:
Objective: min
I
s∑
i=1
I(i) ·
[
P ow(i) − C · P rob(i|F )
]
(10)
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
1 2 3 4 5 6
F1-Score
Training Size (Months)
(a) F-1 Score
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
1 2 3 4 5 6
Precision
Training Size (Months)
(b) Precision
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
1 2 3 4 5 6
Recall
Training Size (Months)
(c) Recall
Fig. 9: Classiﬁcation performance using training sets of
various size. We increased the amount of training data to
include data obtained from 2015.04 to 2015.09 and
conducted tests using data from 2016.03.
where I(i) is an indicator that sensor i should be turned on,
P ow(i) is the power consumption of sensor i obtained from
Table I, P rob(i|F ) is a conditional probability representing
the conﬁdence that sensor i will work well under current
environment factor F .
VI. E VALUATION
In this section, we analyze the data collected over a period
of 13 months and evaluate the proposed schemes for model
selection, failure detection, and sensor selection. Note t hat
some tasks resulted in highly skewed data (i.e., many negati ve
instances are created when a parking space is not occupied,
but only a few positive instances were created when a car
was moving into or out of the parking space). In these cases,
the accuracy is not a representative indicator of detection
performance. Thus, we conducted a more thorough analysis
of the proposed system using accuracy, precision, recall, a nd
F1-score, where accuracy = T P +T N
P +N , precision = T P
T P +F P ,
recall = T P
T P +F N , and F 1-score is the harmonic mean of
them (i.e., 2· precision·recall
precision+recall ), based on the number of positive
samples P , negative samples N , true (false) positive inference
T P (F N), and true (false) negative inferences T N (F N).
A. Model Selection
We applied ten-fold cross validation to data obtained in a
given month in order to show that when training data and
testing data are obtained at close to the same time, their fea ture
distributions are similar and transient events can be detec ted
accurately, as shown in Fig. 8(a). Our results are comparabl e to
those reported for state-of-the-art commercial products [ 5], [2],
with accuracy close to 1 and F1-scores ranging from 0.96 to
1. However, when training data and testing data were obtained
at different times (e.g., separated by one or more months), t he
distributions were often signiﬁcantly different, which gr eatly
reduced the accuracy of the trained models.
As shown in Fig. 8(b), we selected data obtained in four
months ( 2015.04, 2015.07, 2015.10, and 2016.03). Half of
the samples from each month were used as training data. We

===== PAGE 8 =====

 0.85
 0.87
 0.89
 0.91
 0.93
 0.95
KS CombKS StableKW CombKW StableH. CombH. Stable
Avg F1-Score
Fig. 10: Average F1-scores obtained using the model
formulated using data collected in 2015.04 to predict
transient events in the traces in 2015.05, 2015.06, and
2015.07. In this set of experiments, the characterization of
the model is based on features with scores ranked in the top
40%.
then used four models to detect transient events in the other
months. In cases where the testing month was the same as
the training month, we used the other half of the samples for
testing. Clearly, any temporal gap between training and tes ting
undermined detection performance.
One approach to solving this problem would be to use a
larger dataset. Thus, we expanded the training data from 1
month to 6 months (from 2015.04 to 2015.09), and tested the
corresponding models using data from 2016.03, the results of
which are presented in Fig. 9. This shows that the larger data
set does not necessary yield a better F1-score because a chan ge
in the distribution of transient events in one month may be
matched by the distribution of non-transient events in othe r
months. Thus, a large dataset can actually reduce precision
by introducing a larger number of false positive (i.e., trea ting
non-transient events as transient events.) Moreover, incr easing
the amount of training data also increases the time required
for data acquisition and model training.
As described in Sec. V -A, We addressed these problems by
developing six scoring schemes to identify the models and/o r
features best suited to the current testing data. Fig. 10 plo ts
the average F1-score obtained using the model formulated
using data collected in 2015.04 to predict transient events
in the traces in 2015.05, 2015.06, and 2015.07. In this set
of experiments, we calculated the six scores for each featur e
related to the magnetic sensor, light sensor, and LoRa modul e.
In each scoring scheme, the characterization of the model is
based on top-40% features (features with scores ranked in
the top 40%). The high F1-scores imply that the six scores
can efﬁciently identify the drifts in distributions. As sho wn
in Fig. V -A, all of the scoring methods performed similarly,
which implies that KS, KW, and Hellinger distance are all
effective methods by which to address drift in distribution .
Comparing with Fig. 8(b), Fig. 11 further demonstrates
the effectiveness of the proposed scoring schemes in which
features with scores ranked in the top 40% under the
Score
KW stable scoring scheme were selected for classiﬁ-
cation. As shown in Fig.. 11, regardless of the training and
testing data, most of the F1-Scores were than 90%. Among
them, the F1-Scores obtained under the model formulated
using data collected in 2015.08 or 2015.12 to predict transient
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr
F1-Score
Test Month
15.4 15.7 15.10 16.03
Fig. 11: Training based on data from one month with testing
using data from other months. Unlike in Fig. 8, features with
scores ranked in the top 40% under the Score KW stable
scoring scheme were selected for classiﬁcation .
 0
 0.001
 0.002
 0.003
 0.004
 0.005
 0.006
 0.007
 0  50  100  150  200  250  300  350  400
Hellinger
Time (Minutes)
(a) Hellinger distance under
various amount of data
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr
Detection Time (hour)
Month
(b) Time to converge
Fig. 12: Hellinger distance decreased with an increase in th e
amount of data used. With sufﬁcient data, the Hellinger
distance converges, implying that the incoming data
possesses the same distribution.
events in the traces in other months were lower than 90%. This
is due to features with signiﬁcant drift in the distribution s with
scores ranked in the top 40% under the KWstable scoring
scheme.
B. Failure Detection
Fig. 12(a) calculates the Hellinger distance between the fe a-
ture distribution obtained from a period of data for the enti re
month of April. The period, from the starting time of April
to a speciﬁed end time, of used data is increasing from 0 to
400 minutes in April 2015. The Hellinger distance converges
at 220 min, which implies that it takes 220 min to determine
whether incoming data presents the same distribution as dat a
from April 2015.
Fig. 12(a) shows the time required for the Hellinger distanc e
to converge (i.e., Hellinger ≤ 0.001) in various months.
Based on the data collected in this study, it appears that
feature distribution can remain unchanged for several week s.
Fig. 12(b) indicates that it would take 3 ∼ 13 hours to
determine whether incoming data has the same distribution.
Once a change in distribution has been detected, the propose d
model selection method can be used to identify a suitable
model for the classiﬁcation of incoming data.
C. Sensor Selection
Fig. 13 shows the conﬁdence in the accuracy of clas-
siﬁcation events is (true positive and true negative), fals e

===== PAGE 9 =====

10-6
10-5
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
 0.6  0.65  0.7  0.75  0.8  0.85  0.9  0.95  1
CDF
Confidence
TP+TN FP FN
Fig. 13: CDF of conﬁdence for correctly classiﬁed events
(true positive and true negative, i.e., the red line), false
positive events (blue line), and false negative events (gre en
line).
 0.7
 0.75
 0.8
 0.85
 0.9
 0.95
 1
Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr
F1-Score
Test Month
off on adaptive
(a) F-1 Score
106
107
108
109
Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr
Avg. Power (J)
Test Month
off on adaptive
(b) Power
Fig. 14: Detection performance and power consumption with
sensors switched on (red line), all sensors except magnetic
sensor switched off (blue line), and the proposed adaptive
sensor selection scheme (green line).
positive events, and false negative events. As shown, more
than 9% of incorrectly classiﬁed events (i.e., F N and F P)
achieved conﬁdence values equal to or lower than 0.81. These
conﬁdence values make it possible to predict the probabilit y
that a prediction is correct. When conﬁdence is lower than
0.81, additional sensors can be turned on.
Fig. 14 shows the accuracy and power consumption when all
of the sensors are turned on, when all of the sensors except
the magnetic sensor are off, and the results obtained when
using the proposed adaptive sensor selection scheme. When
magnetic sensors are used, the average F1-score is 0.93 and
the power consumption is 5, 114KJ per month. When all of
the sensors are on, the F1-score increases to 0.98 and power
consumption increases by 87 times to 447, 790KJ per month.
The adaptive sensor selection scheme is able to improve the
F1-score to that achieved using only magnetic sensors, whil e
maintaining power consumption at only 2% of the power
consumed when all of the sensors are turned on.
VII. D ISCUSSION
In this study, we sought only to differentiate between
transient and non-transient events; i.e., cars entering pa rking
spaces cannot be differentiated from cars exiting spaces. O ne
potential solution would be to use duplicate magnetic senso rs
and exploit the spatial correlation between them in order to
determine the direction in which cars are moving; i.e., arri ving
or departing. We established a prototype parking node with
two magnetic sensors (i.e., magnetic sensors #1 and #2) on
both sides of the board, separated by 95.5 millimeters. By
Fig. 15: Readings along the x axis collected from two
magnetic sensors located on two sides of the board.
collecting readings through a serial link, we were able to
sample magnetic ﬁelds using the two sensors at a sampling
rate of 100 Hz. Fig. 15 shows the magnetic ﬁeld projected
on the x axis of two magnetic sensors. Magnetic sensor #1 is
closer to the incoming vehicle; therefore, the magnetic ﬁel d
sensed by magnetic sensor #1 is affected by vehicles ﬁrst.
Locating peaks and/or dips in the magnetic ﬁelds makes it
possible to calculate the delay between two adjacent peaks
or dips in order to infer the direction in which vehicles are
moving. We will continue conducting efforts to incorporate
this design in our ﬁnal system.
VIII. C ONCLUSION
In this study, we collected data from a multi-slot parking
area over a period of 13 months to elucidate the challenges
and limitations of three sensing modules used to determine t he
occupancy of parking spaces. A review of interference patte rns
and long-term trends in the data led to the development of
three adaptive machine learning schemes to deal with data of
uncertain accuracy: model selection, failure detection an d sen-
sor selection. A series of experiments validated the accura cy of
the adaptive schemes in the detection of transient events. T he
proposed system is able to improve accuracy by identifying
the most appropriate model and features for training, detec ting
changes in the distribution of incoming data, and identifyi ng
the most reliable sensing modality. Our ﬁndings highlight t he
need for an adaptive machine learning scheme in the design
of parking occupancy detection systems. In future work, we
will continue the data collection process using other sensi ng
modalities. We will also continue to improve the accuracy
of the proposed system and perform ﬁeld studies with actual
prototypes in additional parking sites.
IX. A CKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank Seng-Y ong Lau for his contributions
to the hardware design and prototype of the parking nodes,
and Min-Jhih Huang and Y ou-Zhi-Jia Hu for their assistance
in the processing of the collected data. We are grateful to th e
Computer and Information Networking Center, National Tai-
wan University for the support of high-performance computi ng
facilities. This work was supported in part by the Ministry
of Science and Technology of Taiwan under Grants MOST
105-2633-E-002-001 and 105-2221-E-002-172, and NSFC No.
61572324.

===== PAGE 10 =====

REFERENCES
[1] Accelerating sustainability: Demonstrating the beneﬁt s of transportation
technology. http://digitalenergysolutions.org/dotAss et/933052fc-0c81-
43cf-a061-6f76a44459d6.pdf.
[2] ADEC Technologies. http://www.adec-technologies.ch .
[3] AN218: V ehicle Detection Using AMR Sensor. http://www5 1.honeyw
ell.com/aero/common/documents/myaerospacecatalog-documents/Defen
se Brochures-documents/Magnetic Literature Application notes-doc
uments/AN218 Vehicle Detection Using AMR Sensors.pdf.
[4] ARCT TM1276 LoRa Transceiver module. http://www.arct.c om.tw/we
b/.
[5] Fastprk. http://www.fastprk.com/.
[6] Fastprk — Sigfox Partner Network. https://partners.si gfox.com/produc
ts/fastprk.
[7] Fastprk — Worldsensing. http://www.worldsensing.com/ solutions/mobil
ity/technology/fastprk-en.html.
[8] Hellinger distance. https://www.encyclopediaofmath. org/index.php/Hel
linger
distance.
[9] Honeywell HMC5883 3-Axis Digital Compass IC. https://ww w.seeeds
tudio.com/wiki/images/4/42/HMC5883.pdf.
[10] Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. https://www.encyclopediaof math.org/index.p
hp/Kolmogorov%E2%80%93Smirnov test.
[11] Kruskal-Wallis H Test using SPSS Statistics. https:// statistics.laerd.com
/spss-tutorials/kruskal-wallis-h-test-using-spss-st atistics.php.
[12] The learning curve of smart parking. http://www.nytimes .com/2012/12/
23/technology/smart-parking-has-a-learning-curve-too .html.
[13] Periodic Reporting for period 1 - FASTPRK-2. http://co rdis.europa.eu/r
esult/rcn/186387 en.html.
[14] SFpark project. http://sfpark.org.
[15] Smart Parking Should Be High on List of Priorities for Cit y Man-
agers. https://machinaresearch.com/report/smart-parking -should-be-hig
h-on-list-of-priorities-for-city-managers/.
[16] Streetline and Cisco Introduce Camera-Based Smart Parki ng Sensing
and Integrated Network Solution. http://www.streetline. com/2014/05/st
reetline-cisco-introduce-camera-based-smart-parking-s ensing-integrat
ed-network-solution-2/.
[17] Streetline Inc. http://www.streetline.com.
[18] Taoglas 915MHz Embedded Ceramic Patch Antenna. https:// www.taog
las.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/ISPC.91A.09.0092E.pdf.
[19] TAOS TSL2561 Light-to-Digital Converter. https://cd n-shop.adafruit.co
m/datasheets/TSL2561.pdf.
[20] The project - FastPrk2. http://www.fastprk2.eu/the- project/.
[21] TI MSP430 ultra-low-power Microcontrollers. http:// www.ti.com/lsds/ti
/microcontrollers
16-bit 32-bit/msp/overview.page.
[22] Urbiotica. http://www.urbiotica.com/en/.
[23] Worldsensing starts Fastprk-2 project. http://www.f astprk.com/media-ne
ws/fp-news.html?wsdetail=%20284.
[24] K. Blumer, H. R. Halaseh, M. U. Ahsan, et al. Cost-effecti ve single-
camera multi-car parking monitoring and vacancy detection tow ards real-
world parking statistics and real-time reporting. In Proc. ICONIP 2012
- V olume Part V, pages 506–515. Springer-V erlag, 2012.
[25] D. Brain and G. I. Webb. On the effect of data set size on bi as
and variance in classiﬁcation learning. In Proc. Australian Knowledge
Acquisition Workshop (AKAW-99) , pages 117–128. The University of
New South Wales, 1999.
[26] M. Y . Idris, Y . Y . Leng, E. M. Tamil, et al. Car Park System: A Review
of Smart Parking System and its Technology. Information Technology
Journal, 8(2):101–113, 2009.
[27] P . Legendre and E. D. Gallagher. Ecologically meaningfu l transforma-
tions for ordination of species data. Oecologia, 129(2):271–280, 2001.
[28] S. Mathur, T. Jin, N. Kasturirangan, et al. Parknet: Dri ve-by sensing of
road-side parking statistics. In Proc. MobiSys ’10 , pages 123–136, New
Y ork, NY , USA, 2010. ACM.
[29] S. Nawaz, C. Efstratiou, and C. Mascolo. Parksense: A sma rtphone
based sensing system for on-street parking. In Proc. MobiCom ’13 ,
pages 75–86, New Y ork, NY , USA, 2013. ACM.
[30] San Francisco Municipal Transportation Agency. SFpar k: Putting The-
ory Into Practice - Post-launch Implementation Summary and Less ons
Learned. Technical report, August 2011.
[31] H. Wang, W. Fan, P . S. Y u, et al. Mining concept-drifting data streams
using ensemble classiﬁers. In Proc.KDD ’03, pages 226–235, New Y ork,
NY , USA, 2003. ACM.