

===== PAGE 1 =====

                                VOL. 14, NO. 3, FEBRUARY2019                                                                                                             ISSN 1819-6608 
ARPN Journal of Engineering and Applied Sciences 
©2006-2019 Asian Research Publishing Network (ARPN). All rights reserved. 
 
www.arpnjournals.com 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 639 
RESEARCHES AND APPLICATIONS OF INTELLIGENT 
TRANSPORTATIONS SYSTEMS IN URBAN AREA: 
SYSTEMATIC LITERATURE REVIEW 
 
Youssef EL Mokaddem and Fouad Jawab 
USMBA, High School of Technology (EST) Laboratory of International Management, Decision Making and Logistics 
(MIDLOG) - Fez, Morocco 
E-Mail: youssef.elmokaddem@usmba.ac.ma 
 
ABSTRACT 
The purpose of this paper is to systematically review evidence of exi sting ITS research that could be effective in 
mitigating current problems in City Logistics. We systematically search ed the English and French languages literature 
indexed in Scopus (2010 to July 2018), including: Elsevier, ACM, Spr inger, and IEEE. We also added studies identified by 
experts up to July 2018. The study selection was descriptive and comp arative studies and systematic reviews of Intelligent 
Transportation Systems. Therefore, we independently extracted information on ITS subsystem capabilities & development 
and technologies used. 56 studies met the inclusion criteria, some were in the resear ch and development stage, while others 
have seen some measure of application or deployment. Most studies ad dressed Advanced Traffic Management Systems 
(ATMS), Advanced Public Transportation Systems (APTS) and Advanced Traveller Information Systems (ATIS). Data on 
efficiency measure, technologies used were mixed. Empirical cost data were limited. T his study has a number of 
implications. Practitioners and researchers will gain a greater understanding of  how ITS are carried out in developed 
countries and the type of challenges that have been addressed. Furtherm ore, the results provide insights about the researc h 
path, current technologies and future research directions in the field of ITS. 
 
Keywords: intelligent transportations systems (ITS), city logistics, advanced traffic management systems (ATMS), advanced public 
transportation systems (APTS), advanced traveller information systems (ATIS). 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Intelligent Transportations Systems were 
originally designed for use to face the saturation of the 
transportation infrastructures (M Alam, et al,  2016 [1]) 
due to the growing number of vehicles and the rapid 
urbanization over the last five decades, Figure-1. This 
situation affects people lives mainly in the urban areas, 
while we need, progressively, to move quickly between 
different places. The results are accidents, traffic 
congestion, transportation delays and larger vehicle 
pollution emissions. ITS were introduced to reduce these 
problems or their outcomes. However, the fact that they 
are more difficult to implement in developing countries (H 
Quak and N Nesterova, 2014 [2]) Compared to developed 
countries, which are easier for implementation. 
Despite the challenges related to urban area, there 
is an industry trend towards deploying ITS in cities (K 
Sjoberg, et al ., 2017 [3]; L Zhuhadar, et al ., 2017 [4]). 
Since that, their shown and potential benefits have made 
them attractive. Examples are multiple in both developed 
and developing countries. Nevertheless, currently it is 
clear that constructing more roads to reduce traffic 
congestion is not the “Good” solution, because is more 
expensive, while causing a significant environmental 
impact, besides requiring a more space, which is a vital 
limitation within urban areas. On the other hand, it is also 
straightforward that the improvement of the transport 
infrastructure is essential for the economic development. 
So, the new researches on ITS must take in consideration 
this. 
The State of Intelligent Transportation Systems 
that BH Lee et al., [5] has conducted by 2011, discussed a 
few problematics related to urban area as well, e.g.  
Authors regard the traffic problem as not only a problem 
for individual countries, but also a global topic by 
providing a comparison and analysis of international ITS 
research and development. 
As literature contains several research studies, 
experience reports and cases studies on ITS applications in 
urban area, a systematic overview and synthesis of this 
growing body of research is still missing. In this paper, we 
start filling in this gap by giving a systematic literature 
review of researches and applications of ITS in urban area. 
The sample of our study is limited to some 
selected subset regions (U.S.A, Japan, and European 
Union).  However, this indicates that there seems to exist a 
large number of countries that have implemented or are 
implementing ITS technologies. 
This SLR is considered a valuable addition to the 
available ITS literature, and will allow readers not only to 
take an overview of research and technologies recently 
developed in the field of ITS, but also to give practitioners 
a clear picture of the main challenges faced in the adoption 
of ITS in cities.  
 
 
 
 

===== PAGE 2 =====

                                VOL. 14, NO. 3, FEBRUARY2019                                                                                                             ISSN 1819-6608 
ARPN Journal of Engineering and Applied Sciences 
©2006-2019 Asian Research Publishing Network (ARPN). All rights reserved. 
 
www.arpnjournals.com 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 640 
 
 
Figure-1. Evolution of urban population & world vehicles 
in use (1996-2016) [6]. 
 
2. BACKGROUND 
 
A. Definition of intelligent transportation systems 
From a research point of view, we identified a 
number of a brief literature search discussing and 
interpreting of what ITS is. Y Lin et al., 2017 [7] consider 
that Intelligent Transportation Systems is the application 
of detection, analysis, control and communication 
technologies to transportation in order to improve 
mobility, safety and efficiency. ITS includes a varied 
range of applications that process and share information to 
improve traffic management, reduce congestion, ease 
environmental impact and increase the benefits of 
transportation for both commercial users and citizens, as 
represented in Figure-2. 
In early work on ITS, Figueiredo considers that 
ITS is applying advanced communication, information and 
electronics technology to solve transportation problems 
such as, traffic congestion, safety, transport efficiency and 
environmental conservation (Figueiredo et al., 2001). 
Therefore, on the institutional level, the ITSS ’s 
constitution defines ITS applications as “those systems 
utilizing synergistic technologies and systems engineering 
concepts to develop and improve transportation systems of 
all kinds ” [8]. And according to the Directives of the 
European Union on Intelligent Transport Systems [9], ITS 
are advanced applications which without embodying 
intelligence as such aim to provide innovative services 
relating to different modes of transport and traffic 
management and enable various users to be better 
informed and make safer, more coordinated and ‘smarter’ 
use of transport networks. 
Other recent studies [10], [11] have referred to 
ITS as a part of the Internet of Things, includes vehicle- to-
vehicle (V2V), vehicle- to-infrastructure (V2I), vehicle- to-
everything (V2X) technology and big data analytics in 
order to connect vehicle information and location to other 
vehicles, other transportation modes (such as pedestrians  
 
 
Figure-2. ITS conceptual model [7]. 
 
or bicyclists), local infrastructure and remote infrastructure 
in the cloud. It been clear that, the evolution of challenges, 
technologies, and growing needs of users has affected 
directly the context of what is seen as ITS. Although, we 
have cited the definitions that we consider to be the most 
important and that mark the evolution of ITS concept. 
Figure-2, represent the communication between the three 
main elements of ITS (User, Road and vehicles), by 
sharing and transmitting data in real time. 
 
B. Evolution of intelligent transportation systems 
While research and applications of ITS in urban 
areas are accumulating and growing in different countries 
and through different subsystems, most research and 
reports claim that ITS development started in the 1980s. 
The main ambition was to fully integrate sustainable 
development, in all its components (environmental, social 
and economic), and transportations challenges, into 
national policy. 
Based on the bibliographic analysis performed, 
we found that researches on ITS were dominated by U.S.A 
followed by Japan and European Union researchers and 
institutions. Indeed, most of research literatures indicate 
that the main development on ITS were made in thus three 
regions (U.S.A, Japan and European Union) [4]. However, 
papers that presents clearly the history timeline of ITS 
were limited. Lino Figueiredo et al [13], consider that ITS 
development has gone through three phases: Preparation 
(1930-1980), feasibility study (1980-1995) and product 
development (1995-present). Therefore, James Bunch et 
al. [12], presented the ITS development through four 
generations: First Generation ITS 1.0 (1980-2000), Second 
Generation ITS 2.0 (2000-2003), Third Generation ITS 3.0 
(2004-2005) and ITS 4.0 (2006-present). 
Although, based on the results of such papers, 
and the other government and local reports [14], [15], 
which presents the history of ITS in the country / region 
involved. We have established history time sheet with a 
global perspective Table-1. Through this time sheet, we 
have tried to combine the different historical pervious 
works by distributing it into six main periods, which are 
Preparation (1970-1980), Feasibility study and research 
(1980-1990), First Generation ITS 1.0 (1990-2000), 


===== PAGE 3 =====

                                VOL. 14, NO. 3, FEBRUARY2019                                                                                                             ISSN 1819-6608 
ARPN Journal of Engineering and Applied Sciences 
©2006-2019 Asian Research Publishing Network (ARPN). All rights reserved. 
 
www.arpnjournals.com 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 641 
Second Generation ITS 2.0, Third Generation ITS 3.0, and 
ITS 4.0 (2015-present). Some main ITS technologies 
examples are given for each period in order to have a clear 
idea.  
ITS deployment methods emphasize that 
planning is only meaningful for the near future. However, 
the lack of planning can be a concern as PPP Public-
Private Partnerships often build on long-term road 
mapping. Enabling operation with shorter term planning 
requires educating urban stakeholders and reviewing 
contracting practices. 
 
 
 
Table-1. Time sheet history of ITS evolution (1970-Present). 
 
 
 
C. Applications of ITS in Urban Area 
The difficulty of introducing ITS technologies 
increases in the urban area, and more specifically in the 
developing countries (H Menouar, et al., 2017 [16]).  
The difficulty is partly related to the higher 
institution inertia, which slows down territorial / 
technological change. ITS development is not founded on 
the use of individual solution or technology, but rather on 
a holistic way of thinking. Adopting ITS often requires 
change of the entire culture in the involved environment 
(G Kant et al., 2016[17]). 
Urban area has more dependencies between 
Public institutions. This increases the need for formal 
documentation and approval of different stakeholders and 
thus reduces agility (Juan Antonio, et al . 2015[18]). For 
instance, all institutions affected by the ITS deployment 
need to be informed and consulted, and the deployment 
process must be adjusted according to their requirements. 
 ITS deployment affects directly the PPP (Public-
Private Partnership) management and institutions-citizen 
related services. A key challenge is that ITS adoption must 
move away from life-cycle models and towards iterative 
and feature centric models (DIMITRAKOPOULOS 
George, 2011[19]), which requires a change of mind-set. 
The focus must be shifted from long-term planning to 
shorter term project planning (Y Lin et al ., 2017 [7]), as 
ITS deployment methods emphasize that planning is only 
meaningful for the near future. However, the lack of 
planning can be a concern as PPP Public-Private 
Partnerships often build on long-term road mapping. 
Enabling operation with shorter term planning requires 
educating urban stakeholders and reviewing contracting 
practices. 
Solutions and technologies developed in STI 
projects have been both criticized and advocated, and 
research has shown that accommodating change and 
current challenges may be a factor in both success and 
failure of urban development (G Kant et al., 2016 [17]). It 
has been shown that ITS technologies have improved 
satisfaction of both citizens and local institutions, but on 
the other hand there is evidence that ITS technologies may 
not be a right fit for every urban area (COTRELL, J., et 
al., 2014 [20]). A proposed solution is that each urban area 
seeks its own balance of ITS technologies / infrastructure 
and plan their adoption and deployment process (BB 
Rhoades and JM Conrad, 2017). 
Period Phase Main Technologies Examples
1 1970-1980 Preparation
2 1980-1990 Feasibility study and research
Arterial Traffic Management
Traffic Management Centers
Route Destination & Driver Information Display
Vehicle Diagnostics
Smart Card Reader & Silent Alarm
Automated Fare Collection and Passenger Counting
Traffic Signal Priority
GPS & Vehicle ID
Traveler Information
Trafic monitoring camera
Lane side computer
Traffic & Navigation
Parking Info & Guidance
Ride-Hailing & Carpooling
“V2V” : Vehicles to Vehicles
“V2I” : Vehicles to Infrastruture
"V2X" : Vehicles to everythings
Building Insights
Mobile Asset Insights
Connected infrastructure Logistics Safety
Connected Fleet Logistics Networks
5 2010-2015 Third Generation (ITS 3.0)
Electronic Tolling & HOT 
Lanes
Mobile Devices
6 2015-present ITS (ITS 4.0)
Automated, Connected, 
Cooperating, Electric 
Vehicles
Big data analytics
“Smart cars” Systems
3 1990-2000 First Generation (ITS 1.0)
4 2000-2010 Second Generation (ITS 2.0)

===== PAGE 4 =====

                                VOL. 14, NO. 3, FEBRUARY2019                                                                                                             ISSN 1819-6608 
ARPN Journal of Engineering and Applied Sciences 
©2006-2019 Asian Research Publishing Network (ARPN). All rights reserved. 
 
www.arpnjournals.com 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 642 
3. RESEARCH METHOD 
 
A. Research questions 
Systematic literature review is a method of 
identifying, evaluating and interpreting all available 
research literature relevant to a specific research question, 
or topic area, or phenomenon of interest. It is appropriate 
for summarizing existing research, for identifying gaps in 
the existing literature, as well as for providing background 
for positioning new researches (B Kitchenham et al., 2004 
[21]). 
In this paper, we present the results of a 
systematic literature review on the topic of Intelligent 
Transportations Systems. The review is positioned in, and 
utilizes the literature of, the field of city logistics. In the 
review, we study the following research questions: 
 
•RQ1:  What researches and solutions have been 
developed so far in the field of Intelligent 
Transportation systems?  
•RQ2:  What challenges have been reported for ITS 
applications in urban area context? 
 
While Intelligent Transportations Systems could 
provide many viewpoints to use as research questions, we 
chose these two questions because we consider they 
represent the viewpoints, which are likely to provide 
actionable insights to researchers as well aspractitioners. 
The research questions are intended to present 
complements to each other by highlighting different 
characteristics in the existing ITS deployed in countries 
that could be effective in mitigating problems in urban 
area. 
 
Research process 
The research process consisted of four key steps 
represented in Figure-3, the selection of primary studies 
was done in two steps first using keyword-based database 
searches to identify potentially relevant sources, and then 
manually filtering the search result. The two authors 
executed the manual filtering process independently. Data 
extraction was done by qualitative coding of the selected 
primary studies by the first author. Finally, the results 
were elicited by aggregating and analysing the coding of 
the primary documents. The entire process was audited 
and mentored by the second author. 
 
 
 
Figure-3. Summary of research process. 
 
a) Inclusion criteria 
Based on the research questions and focus of the 
research, we defined four facets to guide our 
inclusion/exclusion decisions: Intelligent Transportations 
Systems research & development, Intelligent 
Transportations Systems applications, Urban Logistics, 
and Empirical. Table-2 lists the facets and gives examples 
on matching topics and irrelevant topics. For a study to be 
included, it need to be relevant on all facets. 
The facet of Intelligent Transportation Systems 
research & development was interpreted according to the 
existing literature review of ITS development, feasibility 
studies on ITS application and official institutional reports 
discussing ITS research & development. 
We included also, studies of institutions that 
focus on ITS development, as well as the parts of larger 
(non-ITS focused) organizations that develop new 
technologies in different area, that can contribute to and 
improve the results of our review. 
We excluded paper discussing Intelligent 
Transportation Systems technical architecture since that it 
is not relevant to our research questions. 
 
Table-2. Inclusion criteria. 
 
 
 
The facet of Intelligent Transportation Systems 
applications was interpreted so that the primary study had 
to present insights on the real case application and 
challenges of ITS deployment. In some cases, the source 
presented very vague indicators on ITS technology 
adopted. For instance, one case (EL FAOUZI, Nour-
Eddin, et al. , 2011 [44]) was included, as there were 
indications of challenges of ITS adoption, although the 
ITS technologies used remained unclearly presented. If 
there were no indications of ITS technology adopted, the 
paper was excluded. 
Facet Relevant topics Examples of non-relevant topics
Intelligent Transportation 
Systems Research & 
Development
Literature review of ITS development, feasibility st udies on 
new ITS application, official institutional reports  discussing  
ITS development.
Intelligent Transportation Systems architecture.
Intelligent Transportation 
Systems Applications
Present insight about the deployement process, appli cation 
challenges and Benefits. Non reputable source that discuss the ITS adoption.
Urban logistics ITS implemented by cities in the selected countries ( U.S.A, 
Japan, France and Germany)
ITS implementation in outside of the selected 
countries
Empirical Case studies, implementation reports Students e xperiments, theory paper

===== PAGE 5 =====

                                VOL. 14, NO. 3, FEBRUARY2019                                                                                                             ISSN 1819-6608 
ARPN Journal of Engineering and Applied Sciences 
©2006-2019 Asian Research Publishing Network (ARPN). All rights reserved. 
 
www.arpnjournals.com 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 643 
Examples of excluded paper are non-reputable 
source that discuss the use of ITS in urban area, and 
merely presenting ITS tools in urban context. 
The facet of urban logistics, we required that ITS 
were aimed at introducing in urban area of the developed 
countries, after our first research we decided to restrict the 
scanning on four regions: the USA, Japan and European 
Union. The Four countries were selected because of 
existing and emerging applications of ITS strategies that 
had resulted in measurable improvements in urban 
logistics. 
We excluded the application of ITS which not 
affect the performance of transportation inside urban area. 
According to the facet of empirical, we excluded 
studies that did not deal with a distinguishable real-world 
case. We excluded textbooks, studies that only presented 
theories, as well as studies that did not include any cases 
of urban area. In addition, we excluded studies on the 
benefits or limitations of ITS in general. Finally, we 
excluded students ’ experiments because it is implausible 
to draw conclusions about the outcome of adoption. 
 
b) Preliminary searches 
Before proceeding with identifying the primary 
studies several preliminary searches were performed. The 
purpose of the preliminary searches was to develop and 
evaluate different search strings. In addition, we used the 
searches to identify a set of relevant papers that should be 
matched by the actual search. We started by looking at the 
most highly ranked occurrences by trivial keywords that 
the final search string could miss. Initial searches were 
conducted using keywords as general as possible, 
including “Intelligent Transportations Systems ” and 
“urban logistics”.  
Based upon these preliminary searches, we 
selected 103 papers that seemed relevant from the title. 
We used this set as a «mind check» when developing the 
database search. 
 
c) Identification of primary studies 
The collection of potential initial studies was 
based on a search of the on- line databases mentioned in 
Table-3. Based on the previously discussed facets, we 
constructed a search string. Nevertheless, our initial 
research has shown that it is difficult to choose keywords 
with good accuracy. Particularly, we have not been able to 
represent urban area and empirical facets with specific 
words. Consequently, we only included research and 
development of Intelligent Transport Systems and their 
applications in the keyword search, which translates into 
an increased manual filtering effort in the following steps. 
The keywords used are indicated in Table-4. 
 
Table-3. Databases included in search, and number of 
matched articles. 
 
 
 
d) Study selection 
All the potential primary studies identified by the 
database search were refined in two stages, first by 
filtering based on abstracts and finally based on the full 
text. The study selection process is described in Figure-4. 
 
 
Table-4. Facets and related search terms used. 
 
  
The keyword search in the database matched 
1437 unique articles. The abstracts of these articles were 
categorized independently by the two authors into three 
categories: include, exclude, and uncertain. 
The two researchers agreed on 1184 exclusions 
and 62 inclusions. The inclusion decisions for the 191 
abstracts with uncertainty or disagreement were resolved 
through discussion. 
At this stage, articles were excluded only if both 
researchers considered it clearly irrelevant, including 
uncertain cases for full text filtering. As a result, 143 
articles were selected for full text filtering. 
Database URL # of matches
IEEEXplore
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org 614
Elsevier (ScienceDirect) https://www.elsevier.com/ 289
Taylor and Francis https://taylorandfrancis.com/ 104
Springer link https://link.springer.com/ 79
The TRIS and ITRD https://trid.trb.org 68
Researchgate https://www.researchgate.net/ 65
Google Books https://books.google.com/ 59
ACM Digital Library http://dl.acm.org 32
HAL https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/ 28
MDPI www.mdpi.com/ 17
US ITS Institutions Report 35
Europe ITS Institutions Reports 26
Japan ITS Institutions Reports 23
1437Total
Facet Keywords used in English Keywords used in French
Intelligent Transportations 
Systems research & 
developement
ITS, "Intelligent Transportations Systems", "Intelligent 
Transportations Systems developement", Intelligent 
Transportations Systems developement, "Smart parking", 
Intelligent Transportations Systems "systematic review".
STI, "Systems de Transport Intelligents", "Developpement 
des Systems de Transport Intelligents", Developpement des 
Systems de Transport Intelligents.
Intelligent Transportations 
Systems applications
(Applicat*, Implement*, Adopt* introduc*, Deploy*) of ITS in 
(=Name of country or (=Name of city)), Smart Parking in * (=Name 
of city), intelligent transportation systems "application benefits", 
Intelligent Transportations Systems "review".
(Applicat*, Implément* Adopt* Mise en place*) des STI au 
sein (=Nome du pays ou (=nom de la ville)), bénéfits de la 
mise en place des systems de transports intelligents, 
applications des systèmes de transports intelligents revue 
de litterature.
Only applications on urban 
area related articles
Intelligent Transportation Systems in urban area, Smart cities 
"benefits", Smart cities "review".
Application des Systems de Transport intelligents dans les 
villes, STI et logistique urbaine, STI et Transport urbain.

===== PAGE 6 =====

                                VOL. 14, NO. 3, FEBRUARY2019                                                                                                             ISSN 1819-6608 
ARPN Journal of Engineering and Applied Sciences 
©2006-2019 Asian Research Publishing Network (ARPN). All rights reserved. 
 
www.arpnjournals.com 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 644 
Full text filtering was conducted by evaluating 
the text of each article against the four facets of the 
inclusion criteria. Filtering was done in two stages. In the 
first stage, the first author extracted data relevant to the 
four facets. Based on the extracted data, 65 papers could 
be immediately considered as included or excluded. The 
remaining 78 papers were evaluated against the inclusion 
criteria by the two authors, and a decision was made after 
discussing each paper separately. Following full text 
filtering, 50 articles were selected for inclusion. 
We assessed the keyword search result in the 
database against the benchmark created in the preliminary 
search step.  We concluded that 71 of the 103 articles 
previously selected were matched by keyword searching in 
the database. The 32 missing preliminary articles were 
reviewed, resulting in the inclusion of four additional 
articles as primary sources. 
In parallel with the full text filtering step stage, 
the relevance of the references of all 143 articles selected 
for full-text filtering was also examined. Most articles 
used very few references, generally referring to well-
known descriptions of intelligent transport systems. This 
step led us to include two additional articles in our 
analysis of the full text. 
As a result, we selected 56 articles for inclusion 
in the analysis phase. 
 
 
 
Figure-4. Outline of the research selection process. 
 
e) Handling of duplicate reports on a single case 
In several cases, more than one primary study 
focused on the development and applications of the same 
ITS technology. Duplicate descriptions generally focus on 
different aspects. For example, one article would highlight 
the R&D perspective on ITS and another would examine 
ITS applications from the perspective of user experience. 
Although ITS applications in a single urban area 
were described in several studies, all sources that met the 
inclusion criteria were included. Studies with the same 
urban area were treated as a single unit so that we could 
obtain as much information as possible on each urban 
area. Conversely, there were also a few articles that 
presented multiple case studies, and in these cases, we 
treated each urban area studied individually. 
Rather than using the most complete article as 
proposed in the guidelines for systematic literature reviews 
(B Kitchenham et al., 2004 [21]), we combined the results 
represented in each article and considered the case as a 
single unit in our analysis. Bearing in mind the potential 
bias caused by duplicate publications, we believe that the 
inclusion of all articles allowed us to gain a deeper 
understanding of individual cases. 
As a result, we identified 52 new technologies in 
the primary studies. We use the term study to refer to the 
primary publications, and the term case to refer to an 
individual case urban area that may be described in several 
different ITS studies. 
 
f) Study quality assessment 
The primary studies for this systemic literature 
review are almost exclusively research papers. We 
identified only seven experience reports with clearly 
defined case studies. Therefore, observations on 
applications were only presented as a minor part of 
research papers. Based on this finding, we conclude that 
case studies of ITS applications in urban areas are very 
rare. We thought that the results would be highly biased 
and that many valuable studies would be left out if a strict 
quality assessment were part of the inclusion criteria. 
Therefore, we have decided to include all experience 
reports, regardless of potential author bias and publication 
problems. 
 
g) Coding of primary studies 
We coded the primary studies following a 
deductive approach, coding both applications report and 
research studies (DS Cruzes and T Dyba - 2011 [22]). We 
established a list of codes for contextual information 
(Table-5), which included urban area/Country, Urban area 
size; Reason to implement ITS, ITS subsystems, Key 
technologies, ITS Service and Challenges. These codes 
related to the research questions were created by a 
deductive process to avoid having our previous 
assumptions affect the choice of codes. 
It should be noted that in this paper, we deal only 
with outcomes related to the challenges and as such, they 
are part of a larger study. 
 
h) Synthesis of primary studies based on coding 
We summarized our findings by creating an 
initial organization of codes into high-level categories 
based on code labels. Each code has been classified into a 
single category. After each code was assigned to a unique 
category, the content of the categories was reviewed. Each 
category has been studied by reading each citation of each 
code included. Typically, citations were posted and 
reviewed in their original context, taking into account the 


===== PAGE 7 =====

                                VOL. 14, NO. 3, FEBRUARY2019                                                                                                             ISSN 1819-6608 
ARPN Journal of Engineering and Applied Sciences 
©2006-2019 Asian Research Publishing Network (ARPN). All rights reserved. 
 
www.arpnjournals.com 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 645 
surrounding paragraphs of the citation. Notes were taken 
on each citation presenting observations of interest. We 
used the notes to create a concise description for each 
code. 
Then we refined the categories according to the 
concise descriptions. Some codes have been reclassified 
and the definitions of some categories have been revised 
until a final order is reached. The results are presented 
based on the final categorization. 
 
Table-5. Context information extracted from studies 
& reports. 
 
 
 
4. RESULTS 
In this section, we present our findings. First, we 
present an overview of the studies. Then, we discuss the 
results organized according to our two research questions. 
 
A. Overview of the primary studies 
In this section we present the type of the primary 
studies, some characteristics of the ITS research & 
solutions, as well as the ITS applications challenges in 
urban area. 
 
a) Study types 
The results include findings from 56 primary 
studies discussing the main ITS technologies and solution 
developed, deployed & used in urban area. Most studies 
were research papers (49 studies). Only seven of the 
included studies are experience reports contained ITS 
applications explicitly detailed. The publication forums of 
the selected papers were distributed so that 29 sources 
were conference proceedings, 20 sources were journal 
articles and seven sources was an institutional experiences 
report. All studies and reports included were dated after 
year 2010. 
 
b) ITS Subsystems 
The complete results related to the ITS 
subsystems are too large to be totally included in this 
review; therefore, we selected the most significant papers 
relevant to our research questions. The result is presented 
into eight major subsystems [12], Table-6.   
The proposed subsystems exclude the application 
of ITS outside urban area, e.g., Advanced Rural 
Transportation systems (ARTS).  
 
 
Table-6. Percentage summary of ITS studies & cases by 
ITS subsystems. 
 
 
 
Results show that the most prevalent ITS 
subsystem was ATMS, which represent the sole subsystem 
mentioned in 63% of cases. The second most mentioned 
ITS subsystem was APTIS and ATIS (in 25% of cases). 
Although, it was quite common that researchers sought to 
combine ITS subsystems in the same paper which led us to 
consider it in our analysis. 
 
c) Urban areas case 
Some urban areas were represented quite evenly 
in the selected countries. According to the result of our 
research, U.S.A was the most represented by 39% of cases 
(including cities such as New York, Seattle, Las Vegas 
and California). The second most represented country was 
Japan by 31% of cases. Followed by European Union by 
26%, while in 4% of studies there was no direct indication 
about the urban area / Country. Table 7 summarizes the 
Percentage of ITS studies & cases performed by the 
selected countries. 
 
Table-7. Percentage summary of ITS studies & cases 
by countries. 
 
 
 
B. ITS Researches and development studies 
In this section, we answer our first research 
question, RQ1: What research and solutions have been 
developed so far in the field of Intelligent Transportation 
systems? We organized the results, into eight subsystems, 
which are elaborated in this section and summarized in 
Table-8. 
The table present the subsystems of ITS. We have 
included list of references to the primary studies and key 
technologies / results that the studies focus on. The 
purpose is to give the reader an idea about the main 
technologies and solutions developed in the selected 
countries. 
 
C. ITS Applications in urban area cases 
Any applications of ITS in urban area involve 
challenges. In this section, we answer our second research 
question RQ2: What challenges have been reported for 
ITS applications in urban area context?  We organized the 
Contextual code Explanation
Urban area, Country Urban area in which the ITS is us ed/Operates
urban area size Mentionning the size of the urban ar ea
Reason to implement 
ITS
Reason to start the 
developement/implementation of ITS
ITS subsystems ITS subsystems developped/used in the urban 
area 
Key technologies Key technologies / results the studies focuses 
on
ITS services Services covered by the ITS adopted
Challenges Statements presenting challenges of the ITS 
applications 
ITS Subsystems % of cases
Advanced Traffic Management Systems (ATMS) 63%
Advanced Public Transportation Systems (APTS) 25%
Advanced Traveler Information Systems (ATIS) 21%
Commercial Vehicle Operations (CVO) 21%
Transit Management Systems (TMS) 17%
Emergency Management Systems (EMS) 13%
Advanced Vehicle Control Systems (AVCS) 13%
Incident Management Systems (IMS) 8%
Counries % of cases
U.S.A 39%
Japan 31%
European Union 26%
Undifined 4%

===== PAGE 8 =====

                                VOL. 14, NO. 3, FEBRUARY2019                                                                                                             ISSN 1819-6608 
ARPN Journal of Engineering and Applied Sciences 
©2006-2019 Asian Research Publishing Network (ARPN). All rights reserved. 
 
www.arpnjournals.com 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 646 
challenges that slowing up the development and 
implementation of new ITS solutions into six categories. 
The categories are summarized in Table-9.  
The table presents the challenge categories, lists 
references to primary sources and experience reports. We 
have included a count of the number of individual cases 
and references mentioned for each factor, and a percentage 
of that count against the application challenges category. 
The purpose of these counts is to give the reader an idea of 
how often the factor was mentioned. We would like to 
note that the frequency of mentions alone is not verifiable 
evidence of the real importance of the factors. 
 
5. DISCUSSIONS 
In this section, we first discuss our general 
observations, followed by a discussion regarding the 
answers to our research questions. Next, we identify 
discrepancies and outstanding issues in the literature. 
Finally, we discuss the limitations and present a research 
agenda for future works. 
 
A. General observations 
The primary studies identified were almost 
exclusively research documents. We could only find seven 
experience reports. None of these research papers directly 
addressed ITS application challenges, although they also 
provided information on the deployment process. As 
shown in our relevance classification in Table-8. 24 
research papers received classification 2, while 18 
received 3 and one received 4 (with a scale of 1 to 5, 
where 5 means the entire article focuses on describing the 
results related to our two research questions). While the 
experience reports were better focused on describing the 
challenges. 
Moreover, belong mentioned challenge in our 
primary studies rose the “Lack of information about 
existing and new ITS applications and initiatives”. 
 
B. Answers to research questions 
This section summarizes and discusses the 
answers to the research questions.  
As an answer to RQ1:  “What researches and 
solutions have been developed so far in the field of 
Intelligent Transportation systems?”, we identified 52 new 
technologies from 2010 until July 2018, the result is 
grouped into eight subsystems, as presented in Table-8. 
The ITS subsystem that stand out are: 1) Advanced Traffic 
Management Systems (ATMS) (63%), 2) Advanced 
Public Transportation Systems (APTS) (25%) and 
Advanced Traveller Information Systems (ATIS) (21%).  
These results clearly explain the growing interest 
of researchers in the topic of ITS as far as their 
applications in urban area. Moreover, it was quite evident 
that most recent research studies focused on big data 
analytics, IoT-based communication (Application of 
vehicle to another entity V2X…). 
To answer RQ2:  “What challenges have been 
reported for ITS applications in urban area context? ” we 
identified 23 challenges grouped into six categories, 
summarized in Table 9 The challenge categories that 
received the most mentions were: 1) Cybersecurity & 
Privacy information (mentioned by 44% of the cases), 2) 
Coordination & collaboration among different 
Stakeholders (40%), 3) Different approaches emerge in a 
multi-actors environment (32%), 4) New ITS solutions 
requireless hardware, more software (28%), 5-6) The 
complexity of ITS Projects (24%) andthe lack of 
investment (20%). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

===== PAGE 9 =====

                                VOL. 14, NO. 3, FEBRUARY2019                                                                                                             ISSN 1819-6608 
ARPN Journal of Engineering and Applied Sciences 
©2006-2019 Asian Research Publishing Network (ARPN). All rights reserved. 
 
www.arpnjournals.com 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 647 
Table-8. ITS R&D studies. 
 
  
Table-9. ITS applications challenges. 
 
 
ITS Subsystems Ref Key technologies / results the studi es focus on Relevance
Advanced Traffic Management 
Systems (ATMS)
[1], [23], [24], [20], 
[25], [32], [33],  [34], 
[35], [36], [38], [39], 
[40], [41], [42]
- Automatic incident detection on arterial roads
- Proposed a relatively simplistic clustering technique in mobile phone for vehicle count, density, speed.
- Seven multi-sensor data fusion-based estimation techniques
- Studying a system to achieve automated driving on expressways
- Expanding the use of ETC and other ITS technologies
- Develop an automatic closed-loop algorithm to determine critical parameters.
- Big data applications in real-time traffic operation
- Vehicular Ad Hoc Network (VANET)
- CMS (changeable message signs)
- Agent and multiagent systems
2, 2, 2, 3, 2, 2, 
3, 3, 4, 3, 3, 2, 
3, 3, 3Advanced Public Transportation 
Systems (APTS)
[5], [35], [37], [38], 
[42], [43]
- Bus Rapid Transit (BRT)
- UHF RFID technologies for real-time passenger recognition 2, 3, 2, 3, 3, 2
Advanced Traveller  Information 
Systems (ATIS)
 [23], [24], [30], [31], 
[37], 
- Generic and multimodal ITS framework
- Generic multimodal transport network model for ATIS applications
- GIS - based automatic transit traveler information system (ATTIS)
2, 2, 3, 2, 2
Commercial Vehicle Operations (CVO) [26], [27], [28],  [34], 
[40]
- RFID technology for order-picking operations
- Research-Based decision-support software suggest for ul timate performance of Freight ITS
- Automated transfer management system (ATMS) at terminal and distribution centers
- Onboard safety monitoring (OBSM) system
- Vehicle pre-clearance programs
3, 2, 2, 2, 2
Transit Management Systems (TMS) [25], [32], [43], [58]
- Evaluation index system
- Automatic vehicle location (AVL) and Automatic passenger count (APC) systems
- Travel assistance device (TAD)
2, 2, 3, 2
Advanced Vehicle Control Systems 
(AVCS)
[26], [33], [42]
- Pneumatic road tube inductive loop detectors, piezoelectric sensors, magnetic sensors, and weigh in 
motion (WIM)
- Video image processor, microwave radar infrared sensors, ultrasonic sensors, and passive acoustic array 
sensors.
- Intelligent shared electric vehicle system 
- Innovated techniques for trip registration, intelligent monitoring, and vehicle communication.
3, 3, 2
Emergency Management Systems 
(EMS)
[29], [32], [36]
- Multi-commodity stochastic humanitarian inventory management model (MC-SHIC)
- The emergency training prototype
- Optimal model for the transportation of emergency resource
- Advanced MMUI systems for emergency management
2, 3, 2
Incident Management Systems (IMS) [1],  [39]
- CIMS efficiency model
- Perceptual Control Architecture of CPSs
- FIAS - Freeway Incident Analysis System
- Cooperative Awareness Messages (CAMs)
- Decentralized Environmental Notification Messages (DENMs)
2, 3
Challenge Group Ref Case # of cases
Cybersecurity & Privacy information (44%)
Skepticism towards the new technologies
Users unwiling to change 
Lack of confidence or reluctance shown by citizens (lack of clarity around benefits).
Coordination & collaboration among different Stakeho lders & technologies (40%)
Interfacing between stakeholders & technologies difficult (Multi-agency, multi-modal, multi-purpose)
More people “in the control loop”
Lack of political will
Different approaches emerge in a multi-actors environ ment (32%)
Keeping the old bureaucracy
Interpretation of ITS differs between stakholders
Using old and new methods side by side
Less hardware, more software (28%)
SW development difficult to manage
Expensive skill marketplace
SW requires a lot of maintenance
Ever-changing security threats
ITS Projects are complex (24%) 
Limited coverage
Lack of information about existing & new ITS applications and initiatives
ITS  Technology readiness and maturity
ITS Customized poorly
Reverting to the old way of working
The adaptation of ITS for urban area growth
Lack of investment (20%)
High cost
Lack of training
Challenges in rearranging public spaces
Old commitments kept
2[2], [10], [18], [56], [4] C3, C9
[2], [13], [19],  [44], [18], 
[45], [51], [53], [56], [20]
C1, C3, C4, 
C5, C10 5
2
5
2[12], [44], [19], [54], [55], 
[56], [20] C7, C8
[2], [19], [46], [48], [20], 
[18] C3, C10
[10], [11], [16], [47], [49], 
[50],  [20], [17] , [4], [3], 
[56]
C2, C3, C4, 
C6, C8
[12], [13], [18], [19],  [7], 
[52], [17], [53] C3, C4, C6 3

===== PAGE 10 =====

                                VOL. 14, NO. 3, FEBRUARY2019                                                                                                             ISSN 1819-6608 
ARPN Journal of Engineering and Applied Sciences 
©2006-2019 Asian Research Publishing Network (ARPN). All rights reserved. 
 
www.arpnjournals.com 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 648 
These results show that ITS appears to be more 
difficult to implement in urban areas than people expect 
because of the different challenges... If these challenges 
are not carefully aligned and studied, this could lead to 
serious limitations for ITS deployment and, therefore, the 
full potential of ITS technologies cannot be achieved. 
These challenges are evolving and vary from one 
ITS subsystem to another based on the prerequisite of 
deployment, and also, from one region to another based on 
the citizens culture. Therefore, according to our scope, the 
result show that ITS cannot be just taken into use off-the-
shelf but must be carefully customized to fit well with the 
characteristics of the urban area and derive the best 
benefits from it. Although ITS is often seen as a grassroots 
movement from development, it is clear that management 
support is needed to achieve urban transformation. Mind-
set and alignment have also increased, emphasizing that 
understanding the purpose behind ITS deployment, 
practices are important and aligning all stakeholders 
towards common purposes facilitates the transition to the 
smart cities. 
There are no literature studies similar to ours on 
ITS, nor are there any specific surveys of ITS applications 
in urban areas. Existing studies and surveys have 
examined ITS in general, and not specifically the 
challenges of its adoption in urban area, e.g. ZEAR, Aditi, 
et al., 2016 [57] providing an overview of ITS progress in 
general.  
The survey on the state of ITS did not highlights 
all current challenges. One explanation for this might be 
that the survey probably had predefined response 
categories limiting responses to them, whereas our 
categories were derived from the data, and were therefore 
not limited to predefined options. 
 
C. Divergences and open issues 
The articles included in our review provided 
several valuable insights in the form of challenges and 
practices. However, in examining the challenges, we can 
notice some divergences, revealing those aspects of ITS 
deployment that would require further study to find out 
more. 
Dealing with bad & old infrastructure. It is not 
clear how and when to completely drop it and its related 
practices. The literature mentions the challenges of 
maintaining the old working method, such as the use of 
"old and new infrastructure side by side", which indicates 
that the coexistence of two different working methods 
generate new problematics. 
 
D. Limitations 
Researchers' bias may have influenced the choice 
of primary studies and data extraction. The selection of 
primary studies may have been distorted by 
misinterpretation of the inclusion criteria. This risk was 
mitigated by the coordination of the two researchers in 
designing the inclusion criteria.  When inclusion criteria 
were used later, abstract filtering was done by both 
researchers independently, and confusing cases were 
resolved through case- by-case discussions. In the full text 
filtering stage, the first researcher performed the initial 
screening by making the decision regarding unambiguous 
cases. For the less clear cases both researchers read the 
paper and made independent proposals for inclusion or 
exclusion decisions. In cases where they agreed, the paper 
was included or excluded on the basis of their joint 
agreement. Articles that were not yet clear were discussed 
and resolved by the two researchers together. 
The second part of the research that could be 
affected by subjective bias was the obtaining of results by 
coding and analysis. Our tools to mitigate this threat were 
limited because the steps are particularly laborious. Due to 
resource constraints, the process could not be duplicated. 
We have tried to avoid subjective biases in the analysis by 
making the results as traceable as possible, by providing 
references to each claim presented in the results. 
A notable problem in this systematic literature 
review was the limitations of Boolean keyword searches in 
on-line databases. A keyword search does not easily 
identify urban areas and empirical facets, and also the 
applications facet is difficult to capture with keywords. As 
a result, we did not include the urban and empirical facets 
in the keyword search, but rather manually reviewed all 
articles selected in the filtering phase to determine if the 
article contained empirical material. This added manual 
work but mitigated the threat. 
For the ITS applications facet, we used a variety 
of synonyms as keywords, but a small risk remains that 
some studies discussing applications without using any of 
the keywords we used remain unidentified.  
Based on our preliminary search, we found four 
relevant papers that were not found by our keyword 
search, and which we included in the study as primary 
sources. In addition, by browsing the references of the 143 
articles selected for full-text filtering, we identified five 
other relevant articles that had not been matched by the 
keyword search and that we included as primary studies. 
By these means, we wanted to make sure to locate papers 
that the keyword search might have missed. The fact that it 
was possible to find additional papers outside the search 
result suggests that it is still possible that our keyword 
search also missed other papers. However, because we 
have made reasonable efforts to identify missed 
publications, we believe that the number of missed articles 
remains very limited and therefore does not have a 
significant impact on the results.  
Only seven references presented a clearly focused 
experience report. For this reason, we considered that the 
results would be very biased and that many valuable 
studies would be left out if a strict quality assessment were 
part of the inclusion criteria. Therefore, we decided to 
include all experience reports, irrespective of perceived 
objectivity. 
The tendency to publish only positive results is 
also another particular limitation of this literature review. 
Studies generally indicated that the development and 
applications of ITS technologies were positive, indicating 
publication bias. A related problem is that most of the 
experience reports were written by people personally 
involved in the projects, so authors may be reluctant to 

===== PAGE 11 =====

                                VOL. 14, NO. 3, FEBRUARY2019                                                                                                             ISSN 1819-6608 
ARPN Journal of Engineering and Applied Sciences 
©2006-2019 Asian Research Publishing Network (ARPN). All rights reserved. 
 
www.arpnjournals.com 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 649 
report implementation challenges. However, most of 
articles did bring up several challenges encountered during 
deployment as well as perceived practices. Given the 
current state of empirical research, it is necessary to 
include studies of varying weight of evidence in order to 
aggregate relevant evidence on urban applications. 
Due to the authors and publication bias of the 
primary studies and the qualitative nature of the ITS 
application descriptions, we decided not to make 
quantitative interpretations in the results, but to use only 
qualitative analysis. Therefore, based on these data, we 
could not, for example, rank the challenges and say which 
are the most important. However, an examination of the 
number of cases cited gives an indication of the 
occurrence of factors in the existing literature. 
Nevertheless, because we do not know how well the 
published articles represent ITS applications, we cannot 
generalize the percentages to all urban area applications. 
 
E. Future research agenda 
Based on our literature review, we identify two 
topics that we think requires significant further study, and 
that together can be considered a research agenda on urban 
ITS applications. 
 
a) Case studies on ITS applications 
A larger number of experience reports with 
appropriate ITS technology in urban areas is absolutely 
necessary. In our review, we delineated the scope of ITS 
applications in the four selected developed countries. We 
were only able to identify seven experience reports on the 
subject. Although the topicality and importance for experts 
is confirmed, by the fact that in recent years, several books 
and courses have been published and organized by 
consultants, and a large number of conferences on this 
subject have been performed. Thus, the 49 research papers 
and the seven experience reports seem to only scratch the 
surface and report experiences from only a small portion 
of the actual number of development and applications 
projects. For this reason, we consider that more case 
studies must performed to gain more insights on ITS and 
how it is deployed in complex contexts. 
 
b) Surveys on challenges and success factors 
Surveys on challenges for ITS projects in general 
have been conducted in several developed countries. Our 
review was limited to selected subset regions (U.S.A, 
Japan and European Union) due to the large number of 
researches in this topic during the last decade.  However, 
this indicates that there seems to exist a large number of 
countries that implemented or are in the process of 
implementation. It is therefore possible to carry out 
interesting survey studies. One topic for further surveys 
would be to explore how the challenges recognized in this 
study, are experienced in other countries: which ones they 
have experienced and which ones they consider most 
important. 
Therefore, the actual situation of urban 
transportation in the developing countries is getting more 
difficult, migration of people from rural to urban areas has 
progressed quite differently compared to that of developed 
countries. Many areas have become urbanized without a 
significant increase in the quality of logistics infrastructure 
and without the development of new suburbs. Therefore, 
more works are needed to fill this gap, where there is a 
tremendous need for studies to understand the several 
challenges facing research and ITS adoption in these 
countries.  
On the other hand, it would be important to study 
the success factors of ITS applications based on real 
experiences. As there are few ITS experience reports in 
the scientific literature, we encourage researchers to 
conduct deep case studies to understand how ITS is used 
and how it is customized. 
 
6. CONCLUSIONS 
We presented a systematic literature review of 
research and empirical studies on ITS applications in 
urban area. We reviewed 56 papers describing and 
presenting qualitative findings of ITS research and the 
challenges posed by ITS applications in urban area.  
The primary studies identified were almost 
exclusively research papers, only seven experience reports 
were included. Thus, the main finding of this study is that 
despite the relevance of the topic for practitioners, real 
cases experiences report is significantly behind schedule, 
and consequently the identified challenges are those that 
practitioners perceive and report as most important. The 
relationship between elements and the objective facts 
remains unknown.   
The challenge categories that received the most 
mentions impact in slowing up the development and 
implementation of new ITS solutions within urban area 
are: Cyber security & Privacy information, Coordination 
& collaboration among different Stakeholders, and those 
different approaches emerge in a multi-actors 
environment.  
As future research topics, we suggest case studies 
and surveys on ITS applications challenges, studies on ITS 
deployment practices & success factors in developing 
countries. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] ALAM, Muhammad, Ferreira, Joaquim, et 
FONSECA, José. 2016. Introduction to intelligent 
transportation systems. In: Intelligent Transportation 
Systems. Springer, Cham. pp. 1-17. 
[2] QUAK, Hans et Nesterova, Nina. 2014. Towards zero 
emission urban logistics: Challenges and issues for 
implementation of electric freight vehicles in city 
logistics. In: Sustainable Logistics. Emerald Group 
Publishing Limited. pp. 265-294. 
[3] Sjoberg, Katrin, Andres, Peter, Buburuzan, Teodor, et 
al. 2017. Cooperative intelligent transport systems in 

===== PAGE 12 =====

                                VOL. 14, NO. 3, FEBRUARY2019                                                                                                             ISSN 1819-6608 
ARPN Journal of Engineering and Applied Sciences 
©2006-2019 Asian Research Publishing Network (ARPN). All rights reserved. 
 
www.arpnjournals.com 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 650 
Europe: current deployment status and outlook. IEEE 
Vehicular Technology Magazine. 12(2): 89-97. 
[4] Zhuhadar Leyla, Thrasher Evelyn, Marklin Scarlett, et 
al. 2017. The next wave of innovation-Review of 
smart cities intelligent operation systems. Computers 
in Human Behavior. 66: 273-281. 
[5] AN Sheng-hai, LEE, Byung-Hyug, et Shin, Dong-
Ryeol. 2011. A survey of intelligent transportation 
systems. In: 2011 Third International Conference on 
Computational Intelligence, Communication Systems 
and Networks. IEEE. pp. 332-337. 
[6] World Bank, Information and Communication 
Technologies: A World Bank data. Washington, DC: 
World Bank, 2018. Available: 
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.URB.TOTL.I
N.ZS. [Accessed: February 28, 2018]. 
[7] LIN Yangxin , Wang Ping, et MA, Meng. 2017. 
Intelligent Transportation System (ITS): Concept, 
Challenge and Opportunity. In: Big Data Security on 
Cloud (BigDataSecurity), IEEE International 
Conference on High Performance and Smart 
Computing (HPSC), and IEEE International 
Conference on Intelligent Data and Security (IDS), 
2017 IEEE 3rd International Conference on. IEEE. 
pp. 167-172. 
[8] The ITSS ’s constitution, IEEE ITS Society, ITS 
definition; Available: 
www.ewh.ieee.org/tc/its/constitution.html. [Accessed: 
Jul. 12, 2018]. 
[9] Žura Marijan et Bićanić, Davor . 2012. Directives of 
the European Union on Intelligent Transport Systems 
and their impact on the Republic of Croatia. 
[10] Shladover Steven E. 2018. Connected and automated 
vehicle systems: Introduction and overview. Journal 
of Intelligent Transportation Systems. 22(3): 190-200. 
[11] CUNHA Felipe, MAIA Guilherme, RAMOS Heitor 
S., et al . 2018. Vehicular Networks to Intelligent 
Transportation Systems. In: Emerging Wireless 
Communication and Network Technologies. Springer, 
Singapore. pp. 297-315. 
[12] Bunch James, Shah Vaishali, Burnier Carolina, et al.  
2012. Review of Existing Literature and Deployment 
Tracking Surveys: Decision Factors Influencing ITS 
Adoption. United States. Joint Program Office for 
Intelligent Transportation Systems. 
[13] Figueiredo Lino, JESUS Isabel, Machado JA 
Tenreiro, et al.  2001. Towards the development of 
intelligent transportation systems. In: Intelligent 
Transportation Systems, 2001. Proceedings. 2001 
IEEE. IEEE. pp. 1206-1211. 
[14] U.S.A. Department of Transportation, Intelligent 
Transportation Systems Joint Program Office , Ashley 
Auer, Shelley Feese et al. History of Intelligent 
Transportation Systems; 2016. [Online]. Available: 
https://rosap.ntl.bts.gov/view/dot/30826/dot_30826_D
S1.pdf? [Accessed: June. 13, 2018].  
[15] France. Ministère De La Transition Écologique Et 
Solidaire, Ministère Chargé Des Transports , Les 
Systèmes De Transport Intelligents (L ’expertise 
Française); 2017. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.ecologique-
solidaire.gouv.fr/sites/default/files/14085_Transport-
intelligent_Web_planches_FR.pdf [Accessed: June. 
14, 2018]. 
[16] Menouar Hamid, Guvenc Ismail, Akkaya Kemal, et 
al. 2017. UAV-enabled intelligent transportation 
systems for the smart city: Applications and 
challenges. IEEE Communications Magazine . 55(3): 
22-28. 
[17] KANT Goos, QUAK Hans, PEETERS René, et al. 
2016. Urban freight transportation: challenges, 
failures and successes. In: Logistics and supply chain 
innovation. Springer, Cham. pp. 127-139. 
[18] Guerrero-Ibanez Juan Antonio, Zeadally Sherali, et 
Contreras-Castillo, Juan. 2015. Integration challenges 
of intelligent transportation systems with connected 
vehicle, cloud computing, and internet of things 
technologies. IEEE Wireless Communications . 22(6): 
122-128. 
[19] Dimitrakopoulos, George. Intelligent transportation 
systems based on internet-connected vehicles: 
Fundamental research areas and challenges. In: ITS 
Telecommunications (ITST), 2011 11th International 
Conference on. IEEE, 2011. pp. 145-151. 
[20] Cotrell J., Steh ly T., Johnson J., et al. 2014. Analysis 
of transportation and logistics challenges affecting the 
deployment of larger wind turbines: summary of 
results. National Renewable Energy Laboratory. 
[21] Kitchenham Barbara. 2004. Procedures for 
performing systematic reviews. Keele, UK, Keele 
University. 33(2004): 1-26. 

===== PAGE 13 =====

                                VOL. 14, NO. 3, FEBRUARY2019                                                                                                             ISSN 1819-6608 
ARPN Journal of Engineering and Applied Sciences 
©2006-2019 Asian Research Publishing Network (ARPN). All rights reserved. 
 
www.arpnjournals.com 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 651 
[22] Cruzes, Daniela S. et DYBA, Tore. 2011. 
Recommended steps for thematic synthesis in 
software engineering. In: 2011 International 
Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and 
Measurement. IEEE. pp. 275-284 
[23] Gao H. and F. Liu. 2013. Estimating freeway traffic 
measures from mobile phone location data. European 
Journal of Operational Research, 229(1): 252-260. 
[24] Bachmann C., et al. 2012. Fusing a Bluetooth Traffic 
Monitoring System with Loop Detector Data for 
Improved Freeway Traffic Speed Estimation. Journal 
of Intelligent Transportation Systems, p. null-null. 
[25] Bachmann Chris, Abdulhai Baher , Roorda Matthew 
J., et al. 2013. A comparative assessment of multi-
sensor data fusion techniques for freeway traffic 
speed estimation using microsimulation modeling. 
Transportation research part C: emerging 
technologies. 26: 33-48. 
[26] Hickman J.S. and R.J. Hanowski. 2011. Use of a 
video monitoring approach to reduce at-risk driving 
behaviors in commercial vehicle operations. 
Transportation Research Part F: Traffic Psychology 
and Behaviour. 14(3): 189-198. 
[27] Bouvard Keomany, Artus Samuel, Bérenguer, 
Christophe, et al.  2011. Condition-based dynamic 
maintenance operations planning & grouping. 
Application to commercial heavy vehicles. Reliability 
Engineering & System Safety. 96(6): 601-610. 
[28] Lee J., et al. 2013. Commercial vehicle pre-clearance 
programs: Current issues and recommendations for 
potential implementation. Transport Policy. 27(0): 92-
101. 
[29] Chunlin D. and Y. Liu. 2012. Sample Average 
Approximation Method for Chance Constrained 
Stochastic Programming in Transportation Model of 
Emergency Management. Systems Engineerin g 
Procedia. 5: 137-143. 
[30] Zhang J., et al. 2011.A multimodal transport network 
model for advanced traveler information systems. 
Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences. 20: 313-
322. 
[31] Schilk G. and L. Seemann. 2012. Use of ITS 
Technologies for Multimodal Transport Operations-
River Information Services (RIS) Transport Logistics 
Services. Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences. 
48: 622-631. 
[32] Up-date of Intelligent Transport Systems in Japan 
Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and 
Tourism Japan 2013. 
[33] YAN Qinglong, SUN Zhe, GAN Qijian, et al . 2018. 
Automatic identification of near-stationary traffic 
states based on the PELT changepoint detection. 
Transportation Research Part B: Methodological . 108: 
39-54. 
[34] Moufad Imane et Jawab, Fouad. 2017. Conception 
and validation of a decision support model for Urban 
Freight Transport. In: Logistics and Supply Chain 
Management (LOGISTIQUA), 2017 International 
Colloquium on. IEEE. pp. 94-99. 
[35] Hasebe Koji, Kato Kazuhiko, ABE Hirotake, et al.  
2017. Traffic management for last-mile public 
transportation systems using autonomous vehicles. In : 
Smart Cities Conference (ISC2), 2017 International. 
IEEE. pp. 1-6. 
[36] Astarita Vittorio, FESTA Demetrio Carmine et 
GIOFRÈ, Vincenzo Pasquale. 2018. Mobile Systems 
applied to Traffic Management and Safety: a state of 
the art. Procedia Computer Science. 134: 407-414. 
[37] LI Chunyan. 2010. Travel Information Service system 
for public travel based on SOA. In: Service 
Operations and Logistics and Informatics (SOLI), 
2010 IEEE International Conference on. IEEE. pp. 
321-324. 
[38] Fayazi, S. Alireza, Vahidi, Ardalan, Mahler, Grant, et 
al. 2015. Traffic signal phase and timing estimation 
from low-frequency transit bus data. IEEE 
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems. 
16(1): 19-28. 
[39] SHI Qi et Abdel-Aty, Mohamed. 2015. Big data 
applications in real-time traffic operation and safety 
monitoring and improvement on urban expressways. 
Transportation Research Part C: Emerging 
Technologies. 58: 380-394. 
[40] Jing Peng, Huang Hao, et Chen Long. 2017. An 
Adaptive Traffic Signal Control in a Connected 
Vehicle Environment: A Systematic Review. 
Information. 8(3): 101. 

===== PAGE 14 =====

                                VOL. 14, NO. 3, FEBRUARY2019                                                                                                             ISSN 1819-6608 
ARPN Journal of Engineering and Applied Sciences 
©2006-2019 Asian Research Publishing Network (ARPN). All rights reserved. 
 
www.arpnjournals.com 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                 652 
[41] Suhas S., Kalyan V. Vismaya, Katti, Manoj, et al . 
2017. A Comprehensive Review on Traffic Prediction 
for Intelligent Transport System. In: 2017 
International Conference on Recent Advances in 
Electronics and Communication Technology 
(ICRAECT). IEEE. pp. 138-143. 
[42] L'hostis Alain, Soulas Claude, Et Vulturescu, Bogdan. 
2016. A Multricriteria approach for choosing a new 
public transport system linked to urban development: 
a method developed in the Bahn. Ville project for a 
tram-train scenario in the Saint-Etienne region. 
Recherche Transports Sécurité. 2016(1-2): 17-25. 
[43] Xiong Gang, Dong Xisong, Fan Dong, et al. 2012. 
Parallel bus rapid transit (BRT) operation 
management system based on ACP approach. In : 
Networking, Sensing and Control (ICNSC), 2012 9th 
IEEE International Conference on. IEEE. pp. 22-27. 
[44] El Faouzi, Nour-Eddin, Leung, Henry, et Kurian, 
Ajeesh. 2011. Data fusion in intelligent transportation 
systems: Progress and challenges –A survey. 
Information Fusion. 12(1): 4-10. 
[45] Moufad Imane et Jawab, Fouad. 2018. The 
Determinants of the performance of the Urban Freight 
Transport-An Empirical Analysis. In : 2018 
International Colloquium on Logistics and Supply 
Chain Management (LOGISTIQUA). IEEE. pp. 99-
104. 
[46] Fries Ryan N., Gahrooei Mostafa Reisi, Chowdhury, 
Mashrur, et al.  2012. Meeting privacy challenges 
while advancing intelligent transportation systems. 
Transportation Research Part C: Emerging 
Technologies. 25: 34-45. 
[47] Koopman Philip et Wagner, Michael.  2017. 
Autonomous vehicle safety: An interdisciplinary 
challenge. IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems 
Magazine. 9(1): 90-96. 
[48] Sun Wen, Liu Jiajia, et Zhan g, Haibin. 2017. When 
smart wearables meet intelligent vehicles: challenges 
and future directions. IEEE Wireless 
Communications. 24(3): 58-65. 
[49] Mehmood Yasir, Ahmad Farhan, Yaqoob Ibrar, et al. 
2017. Internet- of-things-based smart cities: Recent 
advances and challenges. IEEE Communications 
Magazine. 55(9): 16-24. 
[50] Cruz, Carlos Oliveira et Sarmento, Joaquim Miranda. 
2017. Reforming traditional PPP models to cope with 
the challenges of smart cities. Competition and 
Regulation in Network Industries. 18(1-2): 94-114. 
[51] Santana, Eduardo Felipe Zambom, Chaves, Ana 
Paula, Gerosa, Marco Aurelio, et al.  2017. Software 
platforms for smart cities: Concepts, requirements, 
challenges, and unified reference architecture. ACM 
Computing Surveys (CSUR). 50(6): 78. 
[52] Ducret, Raphaëlle. 2014. Parcel deliveries and urban 
logistics: Changes and challenges in the courier 
express and parcel sector in Europe-The French case. 
Research in Transportation Business & Management . 
11: 15-22. 
[53] Macharis, Cathy et Melo, Sandra (ed.). City 
distribution and urban freight transport: multiple 
perspectives. Edward Elgar Publishing, 2011. 
[54] Taniguchi Eiichi, Thompson Russell G., et Yamada 
Tadashi. 2016. New opportunities and challenges for 
city logistics. Transportation research procedia . 12: 5-
13.  
[55] Monzon Andres. 2015. Smart cities concept and 
challenges: Bases for the assessment of smart city 
projects. In: Smart Cities and Green ICT Systems 
(SMARTGREENS), 2015 International Conference 
on. IEEE. pp. 1-11. 
[56] Macharis, Cathy et Kin, Bram. 2017. The 4 A's of 
sustainable city distribution: Innovative solutions and 
challenges ahead. International Journal of Sustainable 
Transportation. 11(2): 59-71. 
[57] ZEAR Aditi, Singh, Pradeep Kumar, et Singh , 
Yashwant. 2 016. Intelligent transport system: a 
progressive review. Indian Journal of Science and 
Technology. 9(32). 
[58] Karim Z., Jawab F. 2017. Management modes and 
urban transit performance: A literature review. 