

===== PAGE 1 =====

sensors
Article
A Novel Vehicle Detection Method Based on the
Fusion of Radio Received Signal Strength
and Geomagnetism
Liangliang Lou 1,2 , Jinyi Zhang 1, Yong Xiong 2,* and Yanliang Jin 1
1 Key laboratory of Specialty Fiber Optics and Optical Access Networks, Joint International Research
Laboratory of Specialty Fiber Optics and Advanced Communication, Shanghai Institute for Advanced
Communication and Data Science, School of Communication and Information Engineering, Shanghai
University, Shanghai 200072, China; liangliang.lou@mail.sim.ac.cn (L.L.); zhangjinyi@staff.shu.edu.cn (J.Z.);
wuhaide@shu.edu.cn (Y.J.)
2 Shanghai Institute of Microsystem and Information Technology, Chinese Academy of Science,
Shanghai 200050, China
* Correspondence: yong.xiong@mail.sim.ac.cn; Tel.: +86-021-6251-1070
Received: 20 November 2018; Accepted: 20 December 2018; Published: 24 December 2018
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045/gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Abstract: A geomagnetic signal blind zone exists between the front and rear axle of high-chassis
vehicle such as trucks and buses, which leads to multiple-detection problem in detecting those
vehicles running at low speed on roads or error-detection problem in the case of the stopping position
of the vehicle is not standard when waiting for the trafﬁc light to change. In order to improve the
detection accuracy of any type of vehicle running at any speed, a novel two-sensors data fusion
vehicle detection method through combining received signal strength from radio stations with
geomagnetism around vehicles is designed and veriﬁed in the paper. Experimental results show
that the accuracy of our proposed method can reach 95.4% and traditional single magnetism-based
detection method was only 83.4% in the detection of high-chassis vehicles.
Keywords: vehicle detection; geomagnetism; received signal strength; two-sensors fusion
1. Introduction
Nowadays, a lot of cities have started to look for intelligent transportation systems. The main
principle of intelligent transportation systems is to assign the appropriate trafﬁc signal time or manage
the parking lots intelligently according to the information collected by vehicle detectors [1].
At present, there are various vehicle detection methods, such as inductance loop [ 2–4],
geomagnetic sensor [5], microwave radar, infrared, video, etc. The video vehicle detector has the
advantages of high detection accuracy, stability and reliability and widely used in the world. It not
only can be used to monitor road conditions, capture speeds, count vehicles, classify vehicle also
plays an important role in the reduction of the number of road accidents [ 6]. However, the cost of
video vehicle detectors is still relatively high compared with other vehicle detectors and many trafﬁc
information collection scenarios do not require image data.
The inductance loop vehicle detector is widely used because of its low cost, strong practicability
and high accuracy. However, it is very difﬁcult to install and maintain the inductance loop vehicle
detectors on the roads, the surface structure of the roads will be seriously damaged and the aesthetics of
the roads or parking spaces will be seriously affected by the installed inductance loop vehicle detectors.
Due to the power supply problem, it is difﬁcult to install the inductance loop vehicle detectors in some
scenarios such as the roadside parking space monitoring application.
Sensors 2019, 19, 58; doi:10.3390/s19010058 www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors

===== PAGE 2 =====

Sensors 2019, 19, 58 2 of 12
Generally, the battery-powered geomagnetic sensor vehicle detectors are available 5–10 cm in
height and 5–15 cm in diameter. And the cost of those detector is about $35 in China and the working
life of those is up to 3 years. Therefore, the geomagnetic sensor vehicle detector has the advantage of
low power consumption, low cost and easy deployment. The geomagnetic sensor vehicle detectors
have been widely used for collecting trafﬁc data and gradually replaced the inductance loop vehicle
detectors in a variety of occasions in recent years.
The earth is a natural magnet with a surface magnetic ﬁeld of about 500–600 mGs. The magnetic
ﬁeld remains relatively stable in a certain area. When a ferromagnetic substance such as vehicle having
a magnetic permeability is present in the area, the magnetic ﬁeld of the region is disturbed, resulting
in the magnetic strength becoming larger or smaller [7]. Geomagnetic sensor is a kind of chip that can
convert magnetic signal into electrical signal. Therefore, vehicles can be detected by analyzing the
change in the magnetic ﬁeld around the geomagnetic sensor.
However, there is a geomagnetic signal blind zone between the front and rear axle of a vehicle [8].
The blind zone is very obvious in the high-chassis large vehicles such as trucks, buses, SUVs (Sport
Utility Vehicles), etc., which leads to multiple-detection problems in detecting those vehicles [9] when
running at low speed on roads. Simultaneously, the stopping position of a vehicle is not standard
when waiting for the trafﬁc light to change or parking on a parking lot, the geomagnetic signal blind
zone problem will cause the vehicle to be undetected by the vehicle detector with the traditional single
magnetism-based method.
The vehicle actuated signal control strategy has been widely adopted in trafﬁc control system
and requires the real-time information about the presence of vehicles from vehicle detectors installed
on roads. The inaccurate vehicle detection results will cause the trafﬁc signal controller to assign
wrong signal timings when the trafﬁc signal controller equipped with the vehicle actuated signal
control strategy [10]. What is more, the coordinated adaptive trafﬁc control system such as Sydney
Coordinated Adaptive Trafﬁc System (SCATS), which requires number of spaces and total space time
during green of each cycle to implement maximum throughput, minimum stops and minimum delay
strategies [11]. The multiple-detection problem will cause the number of spaces and total space time
to be incorrectly calculated and the coordinated adaptive trafﬁc control strategy of the SCATS will
be affected.
Simultaneously, the speed of vehicles entering and leaving the parking lot are generally less than
20 km/h, the multiple-detection problem will lead to large statistical errors. The error-detection of
the parking spaces’ status will bring certain difﬁculties to the managers of the parking lot. What is
more, the detection result of most vehicle detectors is transmitted through the wireless channels, the
wrong detection result will increase the transmission times which resulting in much higher power
consumption of the vehicle detector and probability of wireless channel collision with the other vehicle
detectors. This problem is much more obvious on the industrial district roads and suburban roads
where large vehicles account for a larger proportion of total trafﬁc ﬂows.
In order to solve the multiple-detection problem in detecting those vehicles running at low
speed on roads or error-detection problem in the case of the stopping position of the vehicle is not
standard when waiting for the trafﬁc light to change caused by the blind zone of geomagnetic signals
in vehicle detection procedure, the multi-sensor data fusion detection methods of combining with
optical sensor [12] and acceleration sensor [13] were proposed, experiments results showed that those
methods did improve vehicle detection accuracy. However, the optical sensor can be easily affected by
environmental conditions, such as dust, rain and fog, etc., which leads to misjudgment of the state
of vehicles. The vibration signal generated by vehicles is so weak that an expensive high-resolution
acceleration sensor was required.
The electromagnetic waves exist widely and always affect our lives. A novel radio-based vehicle
detection method was proposed in the literature [14]. A lot of Wi-Fi APs (Access Point) were deployed
on a roadside by the authors of the literature. And the vehicle detection and speed estimation methods

===== PAGE 3 =====

Sensors 2019, 19, 58 3 of 12
are realized by analyzing the change in received signal strength of Wi-Fi signal collected by the laptops
placed on the other roadside. The literature has provided a new way for vehicle detection methods.
In order to improve the detection accuracy in detecting long wheelbase and high chassis large
vehicles running at low speed or stopping at non-standard positions when waiting for the trafﬁc light
to change on a road or parking on a parking lot, we add a FM (Frequency Modulation) radio module
in the traditional single magnetism-based vehicle detector, propose a two-sensors data fusion vehicle
detection method which is realized through combining the received signal strength collected by the
FM radio module and the geomagnetism around vehicles sampled by a geomagnetic sensor.
We build test scenarios to verify the performance of the proposed method by installed vehicle
detectors with the proposed method and traditional single magnetism-based method on the same road.
The experiment results show that our proposed two-sensors data fusion vehicle detection method
bring higher detection accuracy than the traditional single magnetism-based detection method.
The method we proposed has the advantages of easy implementation and low cost, which is very
suitable for vehicle detection applications. The higher detection accuracy of vehicle detector will lay
the foundation for intelligent decision making in intelligent transportation systems.
2. Detection System Architecture and Signal Characteristics
2.1. System Architecture of Vehicle Detection
The vehicle detection system is composed of a LoRaWAN (LoRa Wide Area Network) gateway,
vehicle detectors and a cloud server. The vehicle detector is made up of a battery ER34615M produced
by Ultralife company, Shenzheng, China, a geomagnetic sensor PNI11096 produced by PNI company,
Santa Rosa, CA, USA, a FM radio module SI4708 produced by Silicon Labs company, Austin, TX, USA,
a LoRa module SX1278 produced by Semtech company, Camarillo, CA, USA, and a microcontroller
STM32L052 produced by STMicroelectronics company, Geneva, Switzerland. The detection system
architecture and installation diagram are shown in Figure 1.
Sensors 2018, 18, x FOR PEER REVIEW  3 of 12 
 
In order to improve the detection accuracy in detecting long wheelbase and high chassis large 
vehicles running at low speed or stopping at non-standard positions when waiting for the traffic light 
to change on a road or parking on a parking lot, we add a FM (Frequency Modulation) radio module 
in the traditional single magnetism-based vehicle detector, propose a two-sensors data fusion vehicle 
detection method which is realized through combining the received signal strength collected by the 
FM radio module and the geomagnetism around vehicles sampled by a geomagnetic sensor.  
We build test scenarios to verify the performance of the proposed method by installed vehicle 
detectors with the proposed method and traditional single magnetism-based method on the same 
road. The experiment results show that our proposed two-sensors data fusion vehicle detection 
method bring higher detection accuracy than the traditional single magnetism-based  
detection method.  
The method we proposed has the advantages of easy implementation and low cost, which is 
very suitable for vehicle detection applications. The higher detection accuracy of vehicle detector will 
lay the foundation for intelligent decision making in intelligent transportation systems. 
2. Detection System Architecture and Signal Characteristics 
2.1. System Architecture of Vehicle Detection  
The vehicle detection system is composed of a LoRaWAN (LoRa Wide Area Network) gateway, 
vehicle detectors and a cloud server. The vehicle detector is made up of a battery ER34615M produced 
by Ultralife company, Shenzheng, China, a geomagnetic sensor PNI11096 produced by PNI 
company, Santa Rosa, CA, US, a FM radio module SI4708 produced by Silicon Labs company, Austin, 
TX, US, a LoRa module SX1278 produced by Semtech company, Camarillo, CA, US, and a 
microcontroller STM32L052 produced by STMicroelectronics company, Geneva, Switzerland. The 
detection system architecture and installation diagram are shown in Figure 1. 
3m3m Inductance loop Inductance loopVehicle detectorSTM32L052SI4708SX1278IOSPI
LoRaWAN Gateway
InternetFM Radio StationBATTERY PNI11096SPI
3-3.6V
 
Figure 1. Vehicle detection system architecture and installation diagram. 
The PNI11096 is a low cost magnetic measurement chip produced by U.S. PNI company and 
connects with the microcontroller through a SPI interface in our circuit board. The chip can control 
and measure three independent magneto-inductive sensors and each sensor is individually selectable 
for measurement. The power consumption is only 1μA at idle mode and 1.5mA at sampling mode 
[15]. Therefore, the chip is very suitable for the power-constrained wireless vehicle detectors. 
The SI4708 is a tiny FM radio receiver chip produced by Silicon Labs company, Austin, TX, US. 
It requires only 6.25 mm² of board space and a minimum component count. The SI4708 has highly 
flexible functionality catering to the subjective nature of audio preferences and variable FM broadcast 
environments worldwide.  Two-wire slave-transceiver and three-wire interfaces are provided for the 
microcontroller to read and write the control registers of the chip. The RSSI (Received Signal Strength 
Figure 1. Vehicle detection system architecture and installation diagram.
The PNI11096 is a low cost magnetic measurement chip produced by U.S. PNI company and
connects with the microcontroller through a SPI interface in our circuit board. The chip can control and
measure three independent magneto-inductive sensors and each sensor is individually selectable for
measurement. The power consumption is only 1 µA at idle mode and 1.5 mA at sampling mode [15].
Therefore, the chip is very suitable for the power-constrained wireless vehicle detectors.
The SI4708 is a tiny FM radio receiver chip produced by Silicon Labs company, Austin, TX, USA.
It requires only 6.25 mm2 of board space and a minimum component count. The SI4708 has highly
ﬂexible functionality catering to the subjective nature of audio preferences and variable FM broadcast

===== PAGE 4 =====

Sensors 2019, 19, 58 4 of 12
environments worldwide. Two-wire slave-transceiver and three-wire interfaces are provided for the
microcontroller to read and write the control registers of the chip. The RSSI (Received Signal Strength
Indicator) level will be available by reading from the bits RSSI [7:0] of register 0AH when the seek
operation completes [16].
The SX1278 transceivers feature the long range modem that provides ultra-long range spread
spectrum communication and high interference immunity whilst minimizing current consumption.
The chip can achieve a sensitivity of over −148 dBm using a low cost crystal and bill of materials.
The high sensitivity combined with the integrated +20 dBm power ampliﬁer yields industry leading
link budget making it optimal for any application requiring range or robustness [ 17]. The LoRa
modulation technique also provides signiﬁcant advantages in both blocking and selectivity over
conventional modulation techniques, solving the traditional design compromise between range,
interference immunity and energy consumption. Therefore, the chip is widely used in IoT (Internet of
things) devices. In our application, it is programed by the microcontroller STM32L052 through SPI
(Serial Peripheral Interface) interface.
The ultra-low-power STM32L052 microcontroller with the high-performanceARM Cortex-M0+ 32-bit
RISC core and the maximum operating frequency can up to 32 MHz [ 18]. The microcontroller not
only undertakes the collection of geomagnetic signals and electromagnetic wave signal strength also
undertakes the analysis and processing of these data to form the vehicle detection results and transmits
these results to the LoRaWAN gateway through SX1278 chip.
The LoRaWAN gateway, as a core device, is installed within the effective communication distance
of the vehicle detectors. The LoRaWAN gateway will transmit the collected vehicle detection results to
the cloud server through the Internet. Finally, the results will be displayed on various terminals.
2.2. Geomagnetic Signal Characteristics Analysis
The geomagnetic disturbance signal caused by a vehicle is shown in Figure 2. From Figure 2, we
can see that the area of front and rear wheels has the strongest magnetic disturbance signal. However,
there is a magnetic signal blind zone between the front and rear wheel, which may cause misjudgment
of vehicle status.
Sensors 2018, 18, x FOR PEER REVIEW  4 of 12 
 
Indicator) level will be available by reading from the bits RSSI [7:0] of register 0AH when the seek 
operation completes [16].  
The SX1278 transceivers feature the long range modem that provides ultra-long range spread 
spectrum communication and high interference immunity whilst minimizing current consumption. 
The chip can achieve a sensitivity of over -148dBm using a low cost crystal and bill of materials. The 
high sensitivity combined with the integrated +20dBm power amplifier yields industry leading link 
budget making it optimal for any application requiring range or robustness [17]. The LoRa 
modulation technique also provides significant advantages in both blocking and selectivity over 
conventional modulation techniques, solving the traditional design compromise between range, 
interference immunity and energy consumption. Therefore, the chip is widely used in IoT (Internet 
of things) devices. In our application, it is programed by the microcontroller STM32L052 through SPI 
(Serial Peripheral Interface) interface.  
The ultra-low-power STM32L052 microcontroller with the high-performance ARM Cortex-M0+ 
32-bit RISC core and the maximum operating frequency can up to 32 MHz [18]. The microcontroller 
not only undertakes the collection of geomagnetic signals and electromagnetic wave signal strength 
also undertakes the analysis and processing of these data to form the vehicle detection results and 
transmits these results to the LoRaWAN gateway through SX1278 chip.  
The LoRaWAN gateway, as a core device, is installed within the effective communication 
distance of the vehicle detectors. The LoRaWAN gateway will transmit the collected vehicle detection 
results to the cloud server through the Internet. Finally, the results will be displayed on various 
terminals. 
2.2. Geomagnetic Signal Characteristics Analysis  
The geomagnetic disturbance signal caused by a vehicle is shown in Figure 2. From Figure 2, we 
can see that the area of front and rear wheels has the strongest magnetic disturbance signal. However, 
there is a magnetic signal blind zone between the front and rear wheel, which may cause 
misjudgment of vehicle status. 
  
Figure 2. The magnetic signal blind zone problem of high chassis vehicles. 
2.3. Received Signal Strength Characteristics Analysis 
Electromagnetic wave propagation loss in free space according to the Friis formula is: 
𝑃௥ =𝑃௧𝐷௧𝐷௥(𝜆 4𝜋𝑅ൗ )ଶ, (1) 
Figure 2. The magnetic signal blind zone problem of high chassis vehicles.

===== PAGE 5 =====

Sensors 2019, 19, 58 5 of 12
2.3. Received Signal Strength Characteristics Analysis
Electromagnetic wave propagation loss in free space according to the Friis formula is:
Pr = PtDtDr( λ
4πR )2, (1)
where Pr is the received power, Pt is the transmit power, Dt is the gain of the transmit antenna, Dr is
the gain of the receive antenna, R is the distance between the receiver and the transmitter and λ is the
wavelength of electromagnetic wave.
Due to electromagnetic waves have reﬂection, refraction, diffraction and other phenomena during
the propagation. However, the doppler effect of electromagnetic waves which will increase reﬂection
while increasing the received signal strength is not obvious when vehicle was running at low speed or
static. In order to simplify the model, we only consider the reﬂection and refraction of electromagnetic
waves, the simpliﬁed model is shown in Figure 3.
Sensors 2018, 18, x FOR PEER REVIEW  5 of 12 
 
where Pr is the received power, Pt is the transmit power, Dt is the gain of the transmit antenna, Dr is 
the gain of the receive antenna, R is the distance between the receiver and the transmitter and λ is the 
wavelength of electromagnetic wave.  
Due to electromagnetic waves have reflection, refraction, diffraction and other phenomena 
during the propagation. However, the doppler effect of electromagnetic waves which will increase 
reflection while increasing the received signal strength is not obvious when vehicle was running at 
low speed or static. In order to simplify the model, we only consider the reflection and refraction of 
electromagnetic waves, the simplified model is shown in Figure 3. 
θ1θ1θ2θ1θ1θ2PtPreflPrefrPtPreflPrefrVehicle Detector(a) No vehicle over the detector (b) A vehicle over the detector 
Figure 3. Simplified model of radio signal caused by vehicle influence. 
According to the law of conservation of energy, we can get the following formula: 
𝑃௧ =𝑃௥௘௙௟+𝑃௥௘௙௥, (2) 
where Prefl is the electromagnetic wave energy reflected by the vehicle. Prefr is the electromagnetic 
wave energy refracted by the vehicle. Substituting Equation (2) into Equation (1) we can get: 
𝑃௥ =(𝑃௥௘௙௟+𝑃௥௘௙௥)𝐷௧𝐷௥( 𝜆
4𝜋𝑅)ଶ, (3) 
In Equation (3), the two parameters of R and λ remain unchanged. From Figure 3a, we assume 
that the receiver can fully receive the electromagnetic wave energy from the transmitter when no 
vehicle is present on the receiving antenna. In other words, the electromagnetic wave energy is not 
reflected by the vehicle. If there is a vehicle on the receiving antenna, the vehicle will reflect and 
refract the electromagnetic waves, resulting in lower electromagnetic energy received by receiver 
than no vehicle above it. Therefore, when a vehicle enters the sensing area of the detector, the received 
signal strength (RSS) value sampled by the receiver will be changed significantly.  
3. Detection Method Design and Implementation 
Before designing the two-sensors data fusion vehicle detection method, we first analyze the data 
characteristics of geomagnetism and received electromagnetic wave’s signal strength. We built a  
test-bed to collect and analyze the geomagnetism and received signal strength data.  
Generally, the speed of vehicles is 5–80 km/h on urban roads, the length of vehicles is 3–5 meters 
and the distance between the front and rear vehicles on the same lane is 2–30 m. From the above 
traffic parameters, we can see that the vehicle’s retention time above the sensor is generally more 
than 200 ms and the interval between the front and rear vehicles is generally more than 1 s. According 
to the Nyquist Theorem, as long as the sampling rate of the sensor is greater than 10 Hz, the vehicle 
running on the urban roads can be detected accurately.  
In order to obtain as many characteristics of sensor signals as possible, we use a geomagnetic 
sensor to collect the Z-axis of the geomagnetic signals and the sampling rate is 100 Hz. The received 
signal strength data collected by a FM radio module and the sample rate is also 100 Hz. 
Figure 3. Simpliﬁed model of radio signal caused by vehicle inﬂuence.
According to the law of conservation of energy, we can get the following formula:
Pt = Pre f l + Pre f r, (2)
where Preﬂ is the electromagnetic wave energy reﬂected by the vehicle. Prefr is the electromagnetic
wave energy refracted by the vehicle. Substituting Equation (2) into Equation (1) we can get:
Pr =
(
Pre f l + Pre f r
)
DtDr( λ
4πR )
2
, (3)
In Equation (3), the two parameters of R and λ remain unchanged. From Figure 3a, we assume
that the receiver can fully receive the electromagnetic wave energy from the transmitter when no
vehicle is present on the receiving antenna. In other words, the electromagnetic wave energy is not
reﬂected by the vehicle. If there is a vehicle on the receiving antenna, the vehicle will reﬂect and refract
the electromagnetic waves, resulting in lower electromagnetic energy received by receiver than no
vehicle above it. Therefore, when a vehicle enters the sensing area of the detector, the received signal
strength (RSS) value sampled by the receiver will be changed signiﬁcantly.
3. Detection Method Design and Implementation
Before designing the two-sensors data fusion vehicle detection method, we ﬁrst analyze the data
characteristics of geomagnetism and received electromagnetic wave’s signal strength. We built a
test-bed to collect and analyze the geomagnetism and received signal strength data.
Generally, the speed of vehicles is 5–80 km/h on urban roads, the length of vehicles is 3–5 m
and the distance between the front and rear vehicles on the same lane is 2–30 m. From the above

===== PAGE 6 =====

Sensors 2019, 19, 58 6 of 12
trafﬁc parameters, we can see that the vehicle’s retention time above the sensor is generally more than
200 ms and the interval between the front and rear vehicles is generally more than 1 s. According
to the Nyquist Theorem, as long as the sampling rate of the sensor is greater than 10 Hz, the vehicle
running on the urban roads can be detected accurately.
In order to obtain as many characteristics of sensor signals as possible, we use a geomagnetic
sensor to collect the Z-axis of the geomagnetic signals and the sampling rate is 100 Hz. The received
signal strength data collected by a FM radio module and the sample rate is also 100 Hz.
The veriﬁcation circuit board of the test-bed is placed on the middle of a road. A USB (Universal
Serial Bus) to UART (Universal Asynchronous Receiver/Transmitter) serial cable is used to connect
the microcontroller UART interface to a USB port of the laptop placed on the roadside and the baud
rate of the UART interface is 115,200 bps. Microcontroller will start the geomagnetic sensor to sample
the geomagnetic signal and the FM module to estimate the received signal strength at the frequency of
100 Hz which is generated by a timer of the microcontroller. After that, the microcontroller will enter
into sleep mode. Once the microcontroller is woken up by the periodic timeout event, it will read the
magnetic data from the geomagnetic sensor and the received signal strength data from the FM radio
module. Then, the collected geomagnetic data and the received signal strength data will be sent by the
microcontroller to laptop for further analysis.
In order to collect and analyze the characteristics of geomagnetic signal and received signal
strength disturbed by the high-chassis vehicle, we use a bus with the length of 11 m to pass over the
sensors at different speeds, the speeds are 10 km/h and 60 km/h. The collected data shown in Figure 4.
1 
 
 
Figure 4. The geomagnetism and RSS data when a bus runs at different speeds.
In Figure 4, the geomagnetic data is raw data read from the corresponding register of geomagnetic
sensor, so there is no unit of the measurement. The received signal strength is the value from the
corresponding register of the FM radio module and calculated according to the module’s datasheet.
Therefore, the unit of the received signal strength is dBm. We also analyze the absolute changes in
geomagnetic signal and received signal strength as shown in Figure 4c,d.
From Figure 4a,c we can see that the area between point 7500 and 12,500 of x-axis is the data of
geomagnetism and received signal strength when the front wheel of the bus was passing. The area
between point 12,500 and 20,000 of x-axis is the data of the vehicle body between the front and rear
wheel. The area between data point 20,000 and 27,500 of x-axis is the sensors’ data when the rear wheel
of the bus was passing.

===== PAGE 7 =====

Sensors 2019, 19, 58 7 of 12
From Figure 4a,c we can also see that there is an obvious geomagnetic signal blind area between
data point 12,500 and 20,000 of x-axis. Fortunately, we ﬁnd that the received signal strength data
has obvious signal characteristics in the geomagnetic signal blind area. This phenomenon provides
the possibility to realize two-sensors data fusion detection method in a vehicle detector, which can
improve the detection accuracy of large vehicles running at low speed.
We also analyzed the characteristic of the geomagnetic signal and received signal strength data
when the bus running at high speed. From Figure 4b,d we can ﬁnd that the geomagnetic signal blind
zone is not as obvious as the bus running at low speed and the received signal strength also shifts
drastically as same as geomagnetic signal when the vehicle was passing.
Therefore, if the data of geomagnetism and received signal strength are effectively fused in a
vehicle detection method, it will improve the detection accuracy of different types of vehicles running
at various speed.
3.1. Adaptive Adjustment Algorithm for Reference Baselines
According to the analysis above, if the amount of change in geomagnetism and received signal
strength is greater than decision thresholds, it can be considered a vehicle is detected [19,20]. However,
the geomagnetism and received signal strength are easily affected by environmental factors such as
temperature and humidity, which cause the reference baselines to drift and affect the vehicle detection
accuracy. In this paper, we use the following weighted average method to update the reference
baselines:
B(n) =



B(n − 1) ∗ (1 − α) + α ∗ A(n) (n > 0 and no vehicle exists )
B(n − 1) (n > 0 and vehicle exists ) ,
A(n) (n = 0)
(4)
where n is the serial number of sampling point. Where α is a weighting coefﬁcient and the value of α is
0.05 in the paper. B(n) and B(n−1) is the current and previous reference baseline of geomagnetism or
received signal strength. A(n) is the current sampled data of geomagnetism or received signal strength.
From Equation (4) we can see that the ﬁrst sampled value will be used as the reference baselines.
After that, the reference baselines only can be updated when no vehicle is detected. Otherwise, it will
remain unchanged.
3.2. Vehicle Detection Algorithm Design
In this paper, the state machine mechanism is used to implement our proposed two-sensors data
fusion vehicle detection method. For the sake of easy analysis, we binarized the relevant results before
the method is implemented.
F(n) =
{
1, abs( A(n) − B(n)) ≥ T(n)
0, otherwise (5)
In Equation (5), T(n) is the decision threshold of magnetism-based or received-signal-
strength-based vehicle detection method, the values are derived from a large amount of data analysis.
F(n) is the binary vehicle detection result of magnetism-based or received-signal-strength-based
detection method, a value of 1 indicates that a car has been detected and vice versa.
The proposed two-sensors data fusion vehicle detection method is achieved by fusing the data of
geomagnetism and received signal strength to overcome the limitations and instability of traditional
single magnetism-based detection method. The algorithm principle is shown as follows:
D(n) =



1, i f
(
D(n − 1) == 0 and Fmag (n) == 1 and n > 0
)
0, i f(
(
D(n − 1) == 1 and Fmag (n) == 0 and Frss (n) == 0 and n > 0
)
or (n == 0))
unchanged , otherwise
, (6)

===== PAGE 8 =====

Sensors 2019, 19, 58 8 of 12
where D(n) and D(n−1) is the current and previous binarization vehicle detection status of our
proposed two-sensors data fusion vehicle detection method. Fmag(n) is the current binarization
detection result of the magnetism-based detection method according to Equation (5). Frss(n) is the
current binarization detection result of the received-signal-strength-based vehicle detection method
according to Equation (5). From Equation (6), we can consider a vehicle detected when the amount
of change in the geomagnetic signal is greater than decision threshold and left when the amount of
change both in the geomagnetic signal and the received signal strength are less than the respective
decision threshold.
Due to the existence of geomagnetic signal blind zone, it may cause the value of the binarization
result Fmag(n) to change between 0 and 1 in short time. To overcome this problem, we introduce a
continuous counting mechanism to eliminate the misjudgment caused by the short-term jump, the
three introduced counters are vehicle entering counter CNTvehicle-entering, magnetism-based method
vehicle leaving counter CNTmag-based-leaving and received-signal-based method vehicle leaving counter
CNTrss-based-leaving. Since the sampling rate of sensors are 100 Hz, according to the Nyquist Theorem
and general trafﬁc parameters, the vehicle entering counter’s threshold Cy is set to 10.
Generally, if the speeds of vehicles are fast on a road, the distance between the front and rear
vehicles on the same lane will be much larger than that running at the low speeds. Therefore, the time
interval between the front and rear vehicles running at fast speeds is similar to that running at low
speeds. According to the above analysis, the vehicle leaving counter’s threshold Cn is set to 30 in the
paper. Overall, the vehicle detection status will change only when the value of each counter is greater
than the respective threshold.
The proposed two-sensors data fusion detection method in the paper is implemented based on
the state machine mechanism. The state machine contains 4 states and is realized as shown in Figure 5:
Sensors 2018, 18, x FOR PEER REVIEW  8 of 12 
 
three introduced counters are vehicle entering counter CNTvehicle-entering, magnetism-based method 
vehicle leaving counter CNTmag-based-leaving and received-signal-based method vehicle leaving counter 
CNTrss-based-leaving. Since the sampling rate of sensors are 100Hz, according to the Nyquist Theorem and 
general traffic parameters, the vehicle entering counter’s threshold Cy is set to 10.  
Generally, if the speeds of vehicles are fast on a road, the distance between the front and rear 
vehicles on the same lane will be much larger than that running at the low speeds. Therefore, the time 
interval between the front and rear vehicles running at fast speeds is similar to that running at low 
speeds. According to the above analysis, the vehicle leaving counter’s threshold Cn is set to 30 in the 
paper. Overall, the vehicle detection status will change only when the value of each counter is greater 
than the respective threshold. 
The proposed two-sensors data fusion detection method in the paper is implemented based on 
the state machine mechanism. The state machine contains 4 states and is realized as shown in  
Figure 5:  
do / CNTvehicle-entering++ [Fmag(n)==1]do / CNTvehicle-entering=0  [Fmag(n)==0]do / update reference baselines[Fmag(n)==0]do / CNTmag-based-leaving =0 [Fmag(n)==1]do / CNTmag-based-leaving++ [Fmag(n)==0]Svehicle-existence[CNTvehicle-entering≥ Cy]/ CNTvehicle-entering=0 Snonafter 10ms / get magnetic and RSS datado / CNTrss-based-leaving =0  [Frss(n)==1]do / CNTrss-based-leaving++  [Frss(n)==0]Svehicle-leavingVehicle detection[CNTrss-based-leaving ≥ Cn] / CNTrss-based-leaving   =0entry / CNTmag-based-leaving =0entry / CNTrss-based-leaving   =0entry / CNTvehicle-entering     =0do / load reference baselines from an eepromdo / load thresholds from an eepromSinitafter 10ms / get magnetic and RSS data[CNTmag-based-leaving ≥ Cn] / CNTmag-based-leaving =0 after 10ms / get magnetic and RSS data
 
Figure 5. The state machine of the two-sensors data fusion vehicle detection method. 
Sinit initializes the value of relevant parameters.  
Snon measures the length of the high level magnetic pulse and updates reference baselines. 
Svehicle-existence measures the length of the low level magnetic pulse and detects a vehicle. 
Svehicle-leaving measures the length of the low level RSS pulse and waits the vehicle to leave. 
4. Verification and analysis 
In order to verify the performance of the two-sensors data fusion vehicle detection method 
proposed in the paper, we installed vehicle detectors with the proposed method on a road. For 
comparison, we also installed vehicle detectors with the traditional single magnetism-based method 
and inductance loop vehicle detectors in the same lane. The detectors installation diagram shown in 
Figure 1.  
The algorithm principle of the traditional single magnetism-based method has been described 
deeply in the literature [5,19,20]. Generally, the vehicle existence detected based on the change in the 
magnetism is greater than a specific threshold, the vehicle leaving detection is based on the change 
in the magnetism is less than a specific threshold within a certain time window. There is no Svehicle-leaving 
Figure 5. The state machine of the two-sensors data fusion vehicle detection method.
Sinit initializes the value of relevant parameters.
Snon measures the length of the high level magnetic pulse and updates reference baselines.
Svehicle-existence measures the length of the low level magnetic pulse and detects a vehicle.
Svehicle-leaving measures the length of the low level RSS pulse and waits the vehicle to leave.

===== PAGE 9 =====

Sensors 2019, 19, 58 9 of 12
4. Veriﬁcation and Analysis
In order to verify the performance of the two-sensors data fusion vehicle detection method
proposed in the paper, we installed vehicle detectors with the proposed method on a road.
For comparison, we also installed vehicle detectors with the traditional single magnetism-based
method and inductance loop vehicle detectors in the same lane. The detectors installation diagram
shown in Figure 1.
The algorithm principle of the traditional single magnetism-based method has been described
deeply in the literature [ 5,19,20]. Generally, the vehicle existence detected based on the change in
the magnetism is greater than a speciﬁc threshold, the vehicle leaving detection is based on the
change in the magnetism is less than a speciﬁc threshold within a certain time window. There is
no Svehicle-leaving state in the traditional single magnetism-based vehicle detection method. In other
word, if CNTmag-based-leaving is greater than Cn, the state will jump to Snon and end a complete vehicle
detection procedure.
We used two methods to verify the performance of the proposed vehicle detection method: (i) We
took the manual statistical results as a reference, compared the different types of vehicle detection
accuracy of our proposed two-sensors fusion method and traditional single geomagnetic-based method
at different time of a day. (ii)We took inductance loop vehicle detectors’ statistical results as a reference
and compared overall detection accuracy of the detectors with traditional single magnetism-based
method and the proposed two-sensors data fusion method up to 30 days.
4.1. Accuracy Analysis in Setecting Different Vehicle Types at Different Periods
The peak hours of test road are 07:00–09:00 and 17:00–19:00. The average speed of vehicles is
about 25 km/h during peak time and 50 km/h during idle time. In order to verify the detection
accuracy of different vehicle types at different periods, this paper selects six time periods to verify the
accuracy of the traditional single magnetism-based and the proposed two-sensor data fusion vehicle
detection method.
Generally, the length of family car is generally less than 5 m [21] and the most of the vehicles run
on the urban roads are family cars. For the sake of statistical simpliﬁcation, a big vehicle refers to a
vehicle with the length greater than 5 m, such as buses, trucks, etc. And a small vehicle refers to a
vehicle with the length less than 5 m, such as family cars.
From Table 1, we can ﬁnd that both the traditional single magnetism-based detection method and
our proposed method have higher detection accuracy in the idle time than that in the peak time of the
road. Simultaneously, the traditional single magnetism-based method obviously has multiple-detection
problems in the detection of large vehicles during the peak period. The main reason is that the average
speed of vehicle is slow during peak time or the stopping position of vehicle is not standard when the
vehicles waiting for the trafﬁc light, the blind zone problem causes the same vehicle to be detected
multiple times by the detector with the traditional single magnetism-based algorithm.
From Table 1, we can know that the detection accuracy of our proposed two-sensors data fusion
detection method has relatively higher precision than the traditional single magnetism-based method
in the large vehicle detection process, the detection accuracy of ours is up to 95.4% while traditional
singlemagnetism-based method is only 83.4%. However, the detection accuracy of ours is similar to
the traditional method in the small vehicle detection process. Therefore, above analysis shows that our
proposed method can signiﬁcantly improve the large vehicles detection accuracy, effectively solve the
problem of multiple-detection of those vehicles running at low speeds.

===== PAGE 10 =====

Sensors 2019, 19, 58 10 of 12
Table 1. Short-term vehicle detection statistical results.
Periods
Manual Statistic
Single
Magnetism-Based
Method
Proposed
Two-Sensors Data
Fusion Method
Inductance Loop
Vehicle Detector
big
vehicle
number
small
vehicle
number
big
vehicle
number/
accuracy
small
vehicle
number/
accuracy
big
vehicle
number/
accuracy
small
vehicle
number/
accuracy
big
vehicle
number/
accuracy
small
vehicle
number/
accuracy
07:30–07:50 21 72 24/85.7% 75/95.8% 22/95.2% 73/98.6% 22/95.2% 72/100%
08:00–08:20 19 81 24/73.6% 83/97.5% 20/94.7% 82/98.7% 19/100% 82/98.7%
12:00–12:20 7 39 8/85.7% 40/97.4% 7/100% 39/100% 7/100% 39/100%
12:30–12:50 10 32 11/90.0% 32/100% 11/90.0% 33/96.8% 10/100% 32/100%
17:00–17:20 28 89 32/85.7% 92/96.6% 29/96.4% 93/95.5% 28/100% 90/98.9%
17:30–17:50 24 85 28/83.3% 85/100% 25/95.8% 86/98.8% 24/100% 85/100%
Total 109 398 127/83.4% 407/98.0% 114/95.4% 406/98.2% 110/99.0% 400/99.4%
From Table 1, we can also ﬁnd that whether large or small vehicles, the detection accuracy of
the inductance loop vehicle detector is higher than the vehicle detectors with the traditional single
magnetism-based detection method and our proposed method. The main reason is that the sensing
size of inductive loop vehicle detector is large, resulting in the blind zone is smaller than the vehicle
detectors with the traditional single magnetism-based detection method and our proposed method.
4.2. Long-Term Stability Veriﬁcation
In order to verify the long-term stability of the proposed method in the paper, we used the
statistical data of the inductance loop vehicle detector as a reference. The experimental data from
1 October to 30 October in 2018 is shown as follows.
From Figure 6, we can also see that the overall accuracy of our proposed two-sensors fusion
method is 0.97% higher than that of the traditional single magnetism-based detection method. The main
reason for the result is that most of the large vehicles running on the tested road are public buses and
commuter buses, which will be out of service after 7 PM. What is more, there are very few big trucks
and pickup trucks running on the tested road and the small vehicles account for a high proportion of
the total trafﬁc ﬂow on the tested road.
Sensors 2018, 18, x FOR PEER REVIEW  10 of 12 
 
From Table 1, we can know that the detection accuracy of our proposed two-sensors data fusion 
detection method has relatively higher precision than the traditional single magnetism-based method 
in the large vehicle detection process, the detection accuracy of ours is up to 95.4% while traditional 
single magnetism-based method is only 83.4%. However, the detection accuracy of ours is similar to 
the traditional method in the small vehicle detection process. Therefore, above analysis shows that 
our proposed method can significantly improve the large vehicles detection accuracy, effectively 
solve the problem of multiple-detection of those vehicles running at low speeds. 
From Table 1, we can also find that whether large or small vehicles, the detection accuracy of the 
inductance loop vehicle detector is higher than the vehicle detectors with the traditional single 
magnetism-based detection method and our proposed method. The main reason is that the sensing 
size of inductive loop vehicle detector is large, resulting in the blind zone is smaller than the vehicle 
detectors with the traditional single magnetism-based detection method and our proposed method. 
4.2. Long-Term Stability Verification  
In order to verify the long-term stability of the proposed method in the paper, we used the 
statistical data of the inductance loop vehicle detector as a reference. The experimental data from 
Oct.1 to Oct.30 in 2018 is shown as follows. 
 
 
Figure 6. Long-term vehicle statistics and accuracy comparison. 
From Figure 6, we can also see that the overall accuracy of our proposed two-sensors fusion 
method is 0.97% higher than that of the traditional single magnetism-based detection method. The 
main reason for the result is that most of the large vehicles running on the tested road are public 
buses and commuter buses, which will be out of service after 7 PM. What is more, there are very few 
big trucks and pickup trucks running on the tested road and the small vehicles account for a high 
proportion of the total traffic flow on the tested road.  
From Table 1, we can find that the small vehicle detection accuracy of ours is as similar as that 
of traditional single magnetism-based detection method. Due to the above several reasons, the overall 
accuracy of our proposed method is only slightly improved compared with the traditional single 
magnetism-based vehicle detection method in the long-term test. From the above analysis, we can 
find that the proposed method can work as stable and reliable as the inductance loop and the 
traditional single magnetism-based vehicle detectors. 
5. Conclusions 
Figure 6. Long-term vehicle statistics and accuracy comparison.

===== PAGE 11 =====

Sensors 2019, 19, 58 11 of 12
From Table 1, we can ﬁnd that the small vehicle detection accuracy of ours is as similar as that of
traditional single magnetism-based detection method. Due to the above several reasons, the overall
accuracy of our proposed method is only slightly improved compared with the traditional single
magnetism-based vehicle detection method in the long-term test. From the above analysis, we can ﬁnd
that the proposed method can work as stable and reliable as the inductance loop and the traditional
single magnetism-based vehicle detectors.
5. Conclusions
The paper proposes a two-sensors data fusion method through combining the geomagnetism
and the received signal strength, to solve the multiple-detection problem of the traditional single
magnetism-based detection method in high-chassis large vehicle detection and error-detection problem
in the case of the stopping position of the vehicle is not standard when waiting for the trafﬁc
light to change. The proposed method was veriﬁed on a road, experiment results show that our
designed method has higher detection accuracy compared with traditional singlemagnetism-based
detection method.
The proposed method can greatly improve the large vehicle detection accuracy, especially is
suitable for the scenarios where large vehicles account for a high proportion of the total trafﬁc ﬂow
such as industrial district roads and suburban roads. Simultaneously, the higher detection result
will decrease the transmission and re-transmission times which lead to lower power consumption of
the wireless transceiver module and smaller probability of channel collision with the other detectors.
Moreover, the method we proposed has the advantages of easy implementation and stability as same
as the traditional single magnetism-based vehicle detector.
However, compared with the traditional single magnetism-based detector, the FM radio module
in our proposed method not only increases the cost of about $2 also increases the additional power
consumption of about 10 mWh at the sampling rate of 100 Hz. In the future, we will pay more attention
to the low-power characteristics of the proposed method. For example, the method of the adaptive
adjustment of geomagnetic sensor and FM module sampling rate according to the vehicle speed, the
mechanism of using geomagnetic signal change to trigger FM module to start working will be studied
and implemented in the future work.
Author Contributions: Y.X. and J.Z. supervised the project direction. L.L. designed the hardware. Y.J.
implemented the hardware. L.L. evaluated the system by developing software and developed the ﬁnal software.
L.L. analyzed the data. L.L. wrote the initial manuscript and participated actively in the development, revision
and proofreading of the ﬁnal manuscript.
Funding: This research was supported by the Science and Technology Innovation Action Plan Project of Shanghai
Science and Technology Commission under grant 17DZ1200202.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Chen, R.S.; Chen, D.K.; Lin, S.Y. ACTAM: Cooperative multi-agent system architecture for urban trafﬁc
signal control. IEICE Trans. Inf. Syst. 2005, 88-D, 119–126. [CrossRef]
2. Guilbert, D.; Ieng, S.S.; le Bastard, C.; Wang, Y. Robust blind deconvolution process for vehicle reidentiﬁcation
by an inductive loop detector. IEEE Sens. J. 2014, 14, 4315–4322. [CrossRef]
3. Burnos, P .; Gajda, J.; Marszalek, Z.; Piwowar, P .; Sroka, R.; Stencel, M.; Zeglen, T. Road trafﬁc parameters
measuring system with variable structure. Metrol. Meas. Syst. 2011, 18, 659–666. [CrossRef]
4. Klein, L.A.; Mills, M.K.; Gibson, D.R.P . Trafﬁc Detector Handbook [Electronic Resource] ; U.S. Dept. of
Transportation: Washington, DC, USA, 2006.
5. Markevicius, V .; Navikas, D.; Idzkowski, A.; Valinevicius, A.; Zilys, M.; Andriukaitis, D. Vehicle speed and
length estimation using data from two anisotropic magneto-resistive (AMR) sensors. Sensors 2017, 17, 1778.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

===== PAGE 12 =====

Sensors 2019, 19, 58 12 of 12
6. Ran, F.; Jiang, Z.; Xu, M. VisionBased Lane Detection Algorithm in Urban Trafﬁc Scenes. In Intelligent
Computing in Smart Grid and Electrical Vehicles; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2014; pp. 409–419.
7. Burresi, G.; Giorgi, R. A ﬁeld experience for a vehicle recognition system using magnetic sensors.
In Proceedings of the 2015 4th Mediterranean Conference on Embedded Computing (MECO),
Budva, Montenegro, 14–18 June 2015; pp. 178–181.
8. Markevicius, V .; Navikas, D.; Zilys, M.; Andriukaitis, D.; Valinevicius, A.; Cepenas, M. Dynamic Vehicle
Detection via the use of magnetic ﬁeld sensors. Sensors 2016, 16, 78. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9. Yang, B.; Lei, Y. Vehicle detection and classiﬁcation for low-speed congested trafﬁc with anisotropic
magnetoresistive sensor. IEEE Sens. J. 2015, 15, 1132–1138. [CrossRef]
10. Available online: https://nptel.ac.in/courses/105101008/39 (accessed on 10 October 2018).
11. Samadi, S.; Rad, A.P .; Kazemi, F.M.; Jafarian, H. Performance evaluation of intelligent adaptive trafﬁc control
systems: A case study. J. Transp. Technol. 2012, 2, 248–259. [CrossRef]
12. Sifuentes, E.; Casas, O.; Pallas-Areny, R. Wireless magnetic sensor node for vehicle detection with optical
wake-up. IEEE Sens. J. 2011, 11, 1669–1676. [CrossRef]
13. Hostettler, R.; Djuri´ c, P .M. Vehicle tracking based on fusion of magnetometer and accelerometer sensor
measurements with particle ﬁltering. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.2015, 64, 4917–4928. [CrossRef]
14. Kassem, N.; Kosba, A.E.; Youssef, M. RF-based vehicle detection and speed estimation. In Proceedings of the
75th IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference, Yokohama, Japan, 6–9 May 2012; pp. 1–5.
15. Available online: https://www.pnicorp.com/download/rm3100-user-manual (accessed on 10 October 2018).
16. Available online: https://www.silabs.com/products/audio-and-radio/fm-radios/si4708-09-radio-receivers
(accessed on 10 October 2018).
17. Available online: https://www.semtech.com/products/wireless-rf/lora-transceivers/sx1278 (accessed on
10 October 2018).
18. Available online: https://www.st.com/zh/microcontrollers/stm32l052c8.html (accessed on 10 October 2018).
19. Vancin, S.; Erdem, E. Implementation of the vehicle recognition systems using wireless magnetic sensors.
Sadhana 2017, 42, 841–854.
20. Koszteczky, B.; Simon, G. Magnetic-based vehicle detection with sensor networks. In Proceedings of the
Instrumentation and Measurement Technology Conference (I2MTC), Minneapolis, MN, USA, 6–9 May 2015;
pp. 265–270.
21. Available online: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Family_car (accessed on 10 October 2018).
© 2018 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).