

===== PAGE 1 =====

sensors
Article
An Improved Roadside Parking Space Occupancy
Detection Method Based on Magnetic Sensors and
Wireless Signal Strength
Liangliang Lou 1,2 , Jinyi Zhang 1, Yong Xiong 2,* and Yanliang Jin 1
1 Key Laboratory of Specialty Fiber Optics and Optical Access Networks, Joint International Research
Laboratory of Specialty Fiber Optics and Advanced Communication, Shanghai Institute for Advanced
Communication and Data Science, School of Communication and Information Engineering,
Shanghai University, Shanghai 200072, China; liangliang.lou@mail.sim.ac.cn (L.L.);
zhangjinyi@shu.edu.cn (J.Z.); wuhaide@shu.edu.cn (Y.J.)
2 Shanghai Institute of Microsystem and Information Technology, Chinese Academy of Science,
Shanghai 200050, China
* Correspondence: yong.xiong@mail.sim.ac.cn; Tel.: +86-021-6251-1070
Received: 14 April 2019; Accepted: 21 May 2019; Published: 21 May 2019
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045/gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Abstract: Smart Parking Management Systems (SPMSs) have become a research hotspot in recent
years. Many researchers are focused on vehicle detection technology for SPMS which is based on
magnetic sensors. Magnetism-based wireless vehicle detectors (WVDs) integrate low-power wireless
communication technology, which improves the convenience of construction and maintenance.
However, the magnetic signals are not only susceptible to the adjacent vehicles, but also aﬀected by
the magnetic signal dead zone of high-chassis vehicles, resulting in a decrease in vehicle detection
accuracy. In order to improve the vehicle detection accuracy of the magnetism-based WVDs, the
paper introduces an RF-based vehicle detection method based on the characteristics analysis of
received signal strengths (RSSs) generated by the wireless transceivers. Since wireless transceivers
consume more energy than magnetic sensors, the proposed RF-based method is only activated to
extract the data characteristics of RSSs to further judge the states of vehicles when the data feature of
magnetic signals is not suﬃcient to provide accurate judgment on parking space status. The proposed
method was evaluated in an actual roadside parking lot and experimental results show that when the
sampling rate of magnetic sensor is 1 Hz, the vehicle detection accuracy is up to 99.62%. Moreover,
compared with machine-learning-based vehicle detection method, the experimental results show that
our method has achieved a good compromise between detection accuracy and power consumption.
Keywords: vehicle detection; magnetic sensor; received signal strength; sensor fusion
1. Introduction
In recent years, with the rapid increase in the number of private vehicles, the problem of parking
has seriously aﬀected citizens, and the continued construction of parking lots has been unable to solve
the problem of parking diﬃculties. Since the number of parking spaces in the city cannot be increased
without limit, the best way is to use technology to manage the existing parking spaces to improve the
utilization rate of the existing parking spaces [1]. As a result, Smart Parking Management System based
on Internet of Things (IoT) technology has been applied in many cities [2]. However, the realization of
such systems requires a large amount of parking space status data to support the stable operation of
the SPMS.
At present, there are many technologies to realize parking space status detection, but every
technology has its drawbacks. Inductive-loop vehicle detectors [3] require a wired power supply which
Sensors 2019, 19, 2348; doi:10.3390/s19102348 www.mdpi.com /journal/sensors

===== PAGE 2 =====

Sensors 2019, 19, 2348 2 of 16
makes them diﬃcult to install and maintain. Ultrasonic-based vehicle detector [4] and infrared-based
vehicle detector [5] have the advantages of low cost, small size and high stability, which make them
widely used in indoor SPMS. However, such vehicle detectors are susceptible to environmental factors
such as temperature, light, rain, snow, etc., resulting in that they are rarely used in outdoor SPMS.
The vision-based vehicle detectors [6] have been widely used in a variety of scenarios because they
can provide users with rich and intuitive image information. However, the vision-based vehicle
detectors are rarely used in roadside parking lots to achieve parking spaces status, because cameras
are susceptible to rain, fog and lighting conditions, etc. Additionally, their current costs are relatively
higher than other sensors. In recent years, the laser range ﬁnders (LIDAR) [7] and millimeter-wave
radar [8] have been widely used in autonomous cars. Since the power consumption of these sensors is
very high, their applications in battery-powered vehicle detectors are limited.
The magnetic sensor [ 9] has the advantage of high sensitivity, small size, ﬂexible installation,
strong anti-interference ability, and is basically not aﬀected by environmental factors such as light,
rain and snow, etc. The magnetic-sensor-based WVDs are widely used in roadside parking lots to get
status information of the parking spaces. However, the magnetic signals are not only susceptible to the
adjacent vehicles, but also aﬀected by the magnetic signal dead zone of high-chassis vehicles. As a
result, the vehicle detector based on magnetic sensor may make a wrong judgment or decision on the
roadside parking space status under the above two circumstances.
In order to improve the vehicle detection accuracy of WVDs based on single magnetic sensor,
machine-learning-based vehicle detection methods were proposed in [ 10–15]. This kind of vehicle
detection algorithm mainly uses the machine learning method to analyze and identify the magnetic
disturbance signal caused by vehicles to realize the detection of vehicle status. However, the
shortcoming of the machine-learning-based vehicle detection methods is that they require the magnetic
sensor to collect a large amount of magnetic data at a higher sampling rate and spend lots of time to
process the collected magnetic data. As a result, the vehicle detector needs to spend most of its energy
on magnetic signal acquisition and analysis. In addition, due to the limited resources of low-power
microcontrollers, such algorithms are diﬃcult to be implemented in the low-power microcontrollers.
Simultaneously, the multi-sensor data fusion vehicle detection methods combining magnetic
sensor with optical sensor [ 16] and accelerometer sensor [ 17] were proposed to improve vehicle
detection accuracy, and experimental results showed that those methods did improve vehicle detection
accuracy. However, the performance of optical sensors is susceptible to environmental factors, such
as dust, rain and fog, etc., which may cause the vehicle status to be misjudged under certain critical
conditions. Since the parked vehicle cannot produce signiﬁcant vibration signals on the parking space
that can be sensed by accelerometer sensors and hence the vehicle detection method based on the
magnetic sensor and accelerometer sensor is also not suitable for the roadside SPMS to realize the
detection of parking space status. Moreover, adding new sensors to the vehicle detectors will increase
their cost.
According to the theory of electromagnetic waves, when an obstacle appears in the wireless
path, the intensity of the electromagnetic waves signals is attenuated, resulting in the radio waves
energy received by the receiver is much smaller than that when there is no obstacle. The RF-based
vehicle detection method was proposed in [18,19], where the authors deployed Wi-Fi access points
on a roadside and used laptops to receive the Wi-Fi signals transmitted by the access points on the
other roadside. As a result, the algorithms of vehicle detection and speed estimation are realized by
analyzing the changes in Wi-Fi received signal strengths which are disturbed by the vehicles running
on the road. This provides a new way for vehicle detection methods, however this method cannot
achieve accurate detection when multiple vehicles exist in a small area.
In order to reduce the vehicle detection error rate when the magnetic signals are interfered by
adjacent vehicles or the dead zones of high-chassis vehicles an improved vehicle detection method
based on the combination of magnetic signals and received signal strengths is proposed in the paper.
The principle of the proposed method is that when the data feature of the magnetic signals is not

===== PAGE 3 =====

Sensors 2019, 19, 2348 3 of 16
suﬃcient for WVDs to make an accurate decision on the status of vehicle, the data characteristics of
the received signal strengths generated by the wireless transceivers in the WVDs and wireless access
points (WAPs) will be used to make a further judgment on the vehicle status, thereby improving the
vehicle detection accuracy of WVDs used in the roadside parking lots. Therefore, the proposed method
does not add any cost to the wireless vehicle detector.
In addition, compared with the machine-learning-based vehicle detection methods mentioned
above, the magnetic sensor in our proposed method is used to capture the magnetic disturbance signals
caused by the vehicles without excessive extraction and analysis. As a result, the proposed method
can run stably and reliably when the sampling rate of the magnetic sensor is only 1 Hz, resulting in
a signiﬁcant reduction in the overall power consumption of the wireless vehicle detectors, thereby
eﬀectively extend service life of the battery-powered WVDs. Therefore, the proposed method has very
important practical signiﬁcance.
The remaining of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 analyses the characteristics of
magnetic signals and received signal strengths. Section 3 proposes the vehicle detection method. The
experimental veriﬁcation is presented in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 contains the conclusion.
2. Characteristics of Magnetic Signals and Received Signal Strengths
2.1. System Overview
The wireless sensor network (WSN) is a group of specialized transducers with a communications
infrastructure for monitoring and recording conditions at diﬀerent locations and consists of multiple
sensor nodes, each of which is small, lightweight, portable and battery-powered. Every sensor node is
made up of a transducer, microcontroller, transceiver and power source. The transducer produces
electrical signals based on perceived physical eﬀects and phenomena. The microcontroller processes
and stores the output of the sensor. The transceiver receives commands from a central computer and
transmits data to that computer. The power for each sensor node comes from a battery [20,21].
In general, the roadside smart parking management system is a typical wireless sensor network.
The roadside SPMS is composed of several wireless access points, multiple wireless vehicle detectors
and a cloud server. The wireless vehicle detectors are installed in the middle of parking spaces to
realize the accurate perception of the status of the vehicles on the parking spaces. The wireless access
points, are installed within the eﬀective communication distance of the wireless vehicle detectors. The
wireless access points mainly undertake the establishment and maintenance of the wireless sensor
network, receive and forward detection results from the vehicle detectors to the cloud server. Therefore,
the status of parking spaces can be displayed on various terminals such as personal computers, smart
phones and smart tablets, etc. The architecture of a roadside SPMS as shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1. Roadside SPMS architecture.

===== PAGE 4 =====

Sensors 2019, 19, 2348 4 of 16
2.2. Defects of WVD Based on Single Magnetic Sensor
According to [22,23], we can achieve vehicle detection by analyzing the data characteristics of
magnetic disturbance signals caused by the vehicles on the WVDs. However, the magnetic signals are
easily aﬀected by the adjacent vehicles, including the nonstandard parked vehicles on the adjacent
parking spaces and irregularly traveling vehicles on adjacent lanes, such as the red and blue cars
shown in Figure 1. In addition, the magnetic signal dead zone of high-chassis vehicles also aﬀects the
performance of the WVDs. In order to analyze the data characteristics of magnetic signals aﬀected by
diﬀerent types of vehicles, we installed a WVD in the middle of a parking space. Moreover, we also
installed a WVD at a distance of 40 cm and 80 cm from the parking space respectively. The collected
raw magnetic data is shown in Figure 2.
Figure 2. The raw magnetic data collected by the magnetic sensor 3D MagIC. ( a) The magnetic
disturbance data collected by the magnetic sensors at di ﬀerent distances during a vehicle parking
process, and the sampling rates of magnetic sensors are 20 Hz; (b) The magnetic disturbance signals
obtained by the magnetic sensor when an MPV Buick GL8 slowly passes over a magnetic sensor, and
the magnetic sensor sampling rate is 100 Hz.
From Figure 2a, we can see that the adjacent vehicles do have an inﬂuence on the magnetic
signals, and diﬀerent vehicle types have diﬀerent inﬂuences on the magnetic signals. Therefore, for the
threshold-based vehicle detection method, it is very diﬃcult to select a suitable threshold that can be
used in detecting all vehicle types.
Moreover, from Figure 2b, we can ﬁnd that the magnetic disturbance signals aﬀected by the engine
and axles of vehicle are the strongest, while the magnetic disturbance signal is the weakest between
the front and rear wheels. Hence, it is possible for the vehicle detector based on single magnetic sensor
to make a wrong decision on the status of the vehicle when the sensing region of the vehicle detector is
between the front and rear wheels. This problem is particularly prominent in the vehicles with high
chassis, such as sport utility vehicles (SUVs), multi-purpose vehicles (MPVs) and pickups, etc.

===== PAGE 5 =====

Sensors 2019, 19, 2348 5 of 16
2.3. Radio Signal Mathematical Model
According to the theory of electromagnetic wave propagation that when an electromagnetic wave
encounters an obstacle, the electromagnetic wave can bypass the obstacle in the form of diffraction when
physical size of the obstacle is similar to that of the electromagnetic wave. Similarly , if the physical size
of obstacle is much larger than that of the wavelength of the electromagnetic wave, the electromagnetic
wave will refract at the boundary of the obstacle or directly penetrate the obstacle. In any case, the energy
of the electromagnetic waves will be affected due to the presence of obstacles such as vehicles.
In telecommunication, the free-space path loss (FSPL) is the attenuation of radio energy between
the transmitted radio signal and the received radio signal which caused by an obstacle in free spaces.
The FSPL formula derives from the Friis transmission formula [24]:
Pr = PtDtDr
( λ
4πd
)2
, (1)
where Pr is the received power, Pt is the transmit power, Dt is the gain of the transmit antenna, Dr
is the gain of the receive antenna, d is the distance between the receiver and the transmitter,λ is the
wavelength of electromagnetic wave. The FSPL formula can be used to describe a radio loss value
between the transmit and receive antenna. In the roadside SPMS, the radio loss between the WVDs
and WAPs comes from the inﬂuence of the vehicle present in the radio environment. Assuming that
the directivity for the transmit and receive antennas are isotropic and therefore unity, a convenient way
to express FSPL is in terms of dB [25]:
FSPL(db) = 10log10


(
4πd
λ
)2
 = 20log10(d) + 20log10( f )− 147.55, (2)
3. Implementation of Our Proposed Method
3.1. Hardware Setup of WVD
Generally, the typical wireless vehicle detector consists of a magnetic sensor, a wireless transceiver,
a low-power microcontroller and a battery. According to Equations (1) and (2), we can ﬁnd that the
amount of attenuation depends on the radio frequency and distance. Therefore, we design two types of
WVD prototypes with diﬀerent radio frequencies to evaluate the performance of our proposed method,
and the hardware setups shown in Figure 3a. The magnetic sensor used in our prototypes is the 3D
MagIC produced by the PNI Company, Santa Rosa, CA, USA, the battery used in our prototypes is
ER34615M with the nominal capacity of 15,000 mAh and the open voltage is 3.6 V .
The implementation block diagram of the WVD prototype with 433 MHz radio frequency is
shown in Figure 3a1, and the low-power microcontroller MSP430F5510 is used to control the wireless
transceiver chip CC1101 to achieve wireless communication and the maximum transmission power
is 13 dBm. Similarly, the implementation block diagram of WVD prototype with 2.4 GHz radio
frequency shown in Figure 3a2. From Figure 3a2, the wireless data transmission and reception are
realized through the chip CC2530 which is a true system-on-chip (SoC) solution for IEEE 802.15.4.
Since the maximum transmission power of CC2530 is only 4.5 dBm, we have added a range extender
chip CC2592 to our evaluated circuit board to get better transmission performance, and the wireless
transmission power is up to 20 dBm.

===== PAGE 6 =====

Sensors 2019, 19, 2348 6 of 16
Sensors 2019, 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 17 
 
According to the theory of electromagnetic wa ve propagation that when an electromagnetic 
wave encounters an obstacle, the electromagneti c wave can bypass the obstacle in the form of 
diffraction when physical size of the obstacle is similar to that of the electromagnetic wave. Similarly, 
if the physical size of obstacle is much larger than that of the wavelength of the electromagnetic wave, 
the electromagnetic wave will refract at the boun dary of the obstacle or directly penetrate the 
obstacle. In any case, the energy of the electromagnetic waves will be affected due to the presence of 
obstacles such as vehicles. 
In telecommunication, the free-space path loss (FSPL) is the attenuation of radio energy between 
the transmitted radio signal and the received radio signal which caused by an obstacle in free spaces. 
The FSPL formula derives from the Friis transmission formula [24]: 
𝑃௥=𝑃 ௧𝐷௧𝐷௥(𝜆 4𝜋𝑑ൗ )ଶ, (1)
where 𝑃௥ is the received power, 𝑃௧ is the transmit power, 𝐷௧ is the gain of the transmit antenna, 𝐷௥ 
is the gain of the receive antenna, 𝑑 is the distance between the receiver and the transmitter, 𝜆 is the 
wavelength of electromagnetic wave . The FSPL formula can be used to describe a radio loss value 
between the transmit and receive antenna. In the roadside SPMS, the radio loss between the WVDs 
and WAPs comes from the influence of the vehicle present in the radio environment. Assuming that 
the directivity for the transmit and receive antennas are isotropic and therefore unity, a convenient 
way to express FSPL is in terms of dB [25]: 
𝐹𝑆𝑃𝐿(𝑑𝑏) =1 0 𝑙 𝑜 𝑔
ଵ଴ቆ൬4𝜋𝑑
𝜆 ൰
ଶ
ቇ = 20𝑙𝑜𝑔ଵ଴(𝑑) +2 0 𝑙 𝑜 𝑔ଵ଴(𝑓) − 147.55, (2) 
3. Implementation of Our Proposed Method 
3.1. Hardware Setup of WVD 
Generally, the typical wireless vehicle detector consists of a magnetic sensor, a wireless 
transceiver, a low-power microcontroller and a battery. According to Equations (1) and (2), we can 
find that the amount of attenuation depends on the radio frequency and distance. Therefore, we 
design two types of WVD prototypes with different radio frequencies to evaluate the performance of 
our proposed method, and the hardware setups shown in Figure 3a. The magnetic sensor used in our 
prototypes is the 3D MagIC produced by the PNI Company, Santa Rosa, CA, USA, the battery used 
in our prototypes is ER34615M with the nominal capacity of 15,000 mAh and the open voltage is 3.6 
V. 
 
 
(a) 
WAP
WAP
WAP
(1) Condition 1: No vehicle exist in the parking spaces before and after
WVD evaluated in our experiment
Wireless Vehicle Detector (WVD)
(2) Condition2 : No vehicle exists in the front of the parking space 
(3) Condition 3: One or more vehicles exist in the parking spaces before and after
WVD evaluated in our experiment
Wireless Vehicle Detector (WVD)
WVD evaluated in our experiment
Wireless Vehicle Detector (WVD)
θθ
...
...
...
3m, 6m or 10m
...
3m, 6m or 10m
...
3m, 6m or 10m
 
(b) 
Figure 3. The hardware setups and different evaluation scenarios. (a) The hardware implementation of
two types of wireless vehicle detector prototypes; (b) Three different evaluation and verification scenarios.
3.2. Characteristic Analysis of Magnetic Signals and Received Signal Strengths
The main aim of the proposed method is to fuse the wireless RSSs and magnetic signals to
achieve accurate status of the vehicles parked on the roadside parking spaces. Therefore, before the
implementation of the proposed vehicle detection method, we need to collect and analyze the data
feature of RSSs and magnetic signals. Therefore, we installed above mentioned two types of WVD
prototypes in the real roadside parking space to obtain RSSs and the raw magnetic data.
Generally, both the wireless transceivers in the WVD and WAP can generate an RSS when they
receive a wireless data packet from the each other. In order to enhance the robustness of our proposed
vehicle detection method, we need to collect the RSSs as much as possible. Hence, we append the
RSSs generated by the WAP to the acknowledgement packets when the WAP receives messages from
WVDs. In other words, when a complete wireless data interaction process is completed, the WVD
can obtain two RSS data, one generated by itself and the other generated by the WAP . According to
Equation (2), the electromagnetic wave energy received by wireless transceivers will be aﬀected when
vehicles appear in the wireless environment. Therefore, we collected and analyzed the data feature of
RSSs and magnetic signals in three cases as shown in Figure 3b, which were: no vehicle on both front
and behind, one or more vehicles on the behind, one or more vehicles on both front and behind. At
the same time, considering that the antenna of the WAP at diﬀerent heights may have some impacts
on the RSSs, we installed the antenna of the WAP at di ﬀerent heights and carried out experiments
respectively. The installation heights were: 3, 6 and 10 m as shown in Figure 3b too. The collected raw
magnetic data and RSSs are shown in Figure 4.
From Figure 4 we can ﬁnd that when a vehicle enters or leaves the sensing region of the vehicle
detector, the magnetic signals and received signal strengths both change dramatically. Once the vehicle
parking process is completed, the magnetic signals and the received signal strengths will remain
relatively stable. From Figure 4b1 we can also ﬁnd that the magnetic disturbance signals aﬀected by
the parked vehicle are so weak that may cause the WVDs with the single magnetism-based method
to make a wrong decision on the status of the vehicle. Fortunately, from Figure 4b2,b3, the received
signal strengths have changed signiﬁcantly when the vehicle is present in the parking space, so it is
completely feasible to use the data characteristics of the received signal strengths to further judge the
state of the vehicle.

===== PAGE 7 =====

Sensors 2019, 19, 2348 7 of 16
Figure 4. The raw magnetic raw data and raw RSSs a ﬀected by vehicle parking processes, and the
tested vehicle is an MPV Buick GL8. (a) The WAP antenna is 3-meter-high and there are no vehicles
in the parking spaces between WAP and WVD as the scenario shown in Figure 3b1; ( b) The WAP
antenna is 3-meter-high and there are some vehicles in the parking spaces between WAP and WVD as
the scenario shown in Figure 3b3; (c) The WAP antenna is 6-meter-high and there are some vehicles in
the parking spaces between WAP and WVD as the scenario shown in Figure 3b3; (d) The WAP antenna
is 10-meter-high and there are some vehicles in the parking spaces between WAP and WVD as the
scenario shown in Figure 3b3.
From Figure 4b–d we can ﬁnd that the attenuation of the radio wave energy aﬀected by the same
vehicle increases as the installation height of the WAP antenna increases, and the possible cause of this
is that the electromagnetic wave energy reﬂected by the vehicle body when the WAP antenna at height
of 10 m is larger than that when the WAP antenna at height of 6 m and 3 m. We can also ﬁnd that
the higher the radio frequency, the more frequent changes occur when the vehicle enters or leaves the
parking space.
From Figure 4, we can also ﬁnd that the higher the frequency band of electromagnetic waves, the
more frequent changes in the received signal strengths when vehicles enter or leave the parking space.
However, the received signal strengths of the two frequency bands remain relatively stable after the
vehicle is turned oﬀ. In summary, the data features of the RSSs generated by the wireless transceivers
with the working frequency of 433 MHz and 2.4 GHz both can be used to detect the vehicle status.

===== PAGE 8 =====

Sensors 2019, 19, 2348 8 of 16
3.3. Overview of Our Proposed Method
According to the above analysis, if the amount of change in the magnetic signals is greater or
less than the decision threshold, it can be considered that a vehicle has been detected or left, and this
method will be called “magnetism-based method”. Similarly, if the amount of change in the received
signal strengths is greater or less than a given threshold, a vehicle can be considered detected or left
too, and we named this method “RF-based method”. We implemented our vehicle detection method
in two phases, and the overview of our proposed vehicle detection method as shown in Figure 5a.
Figure 5. The implementation block diagram of proposed vehicle detection method. (a) Overview of
our proposed vehicle detection method; (b) The implementation block diagram of our proposed fusion
vehicle detection method.
3.3.1. Phase 1
From Figure 5a, three thresholds, Tmh, Tml and Trss are very important and will aﬀect the accuracy
of our proposed method. In order to get the three thresholds, we used magnetic sensors and wireless
transceivers to collect the magnetic raw data and RSSs aﬀected by diﬀerent types of vehicles during
their parking processes before our proposed vehicle detection method was implemented. Then, the
three appropriate threshold values for our proposed method were derived from observation and
analysis of large number of experimental results. The thresholds used in our proposed vehicle detection
method are listed in Table 1.
Table 1. Three thresholds used in our proposed method.
Parameters Description Value
Tmh vehicle entering decision threshold of magnetism-based detection method 20
Tml vehicle leaving decision threshold of magnetism-based detection method 5
Trss vehicle decision threshold of RF-based vehicle detection method 5
3.3.2. Phase 2
During this phase, the status of vehicles can be accurately detected by our proposed method.
The magnetic sensor was periodically activated to collect the magnetic data and extract the data
characteristics of magnetic signals to realize the vehicle detection. Since the magnetic signal dead
zone exists between the front and rear wheels of the high-chassis vehicle, and magnetic signals are
vulnerable to be aﬀected by the irregularly parked vehicles on the adjacent parking spaces and slowly
moving vehicles on the adjacent lane, the magnetism-based vehicle detection method may make wrong
decisions on the status of parking spaces under above conditions. Therefore, in order to improve the
detection accuracy, the RF-based vehicle detection method was activated to make a further judgment
on the vehicle status when the magnetism-based method cannot obtain an accurate decision on them.

===== PAGE 9 =====

Sensors 2019, 19, 2348 9 of 16
3.4. Implementation of Our Proposed Method
The vehicle detection method based on threshold algorithm has the advantages of low algorithm
complexity, high reliability and low implementation di ﬃculty. According to literature [ 15], if the
appropriate thresholds and background references are selected, the threshold-based algorithm
can detect the vehicle status accurately. Hence, the threshold-based algorithm is well suited for
battery-powered WVDs to detect vehicle status and is widely used in many commercial wireless
vehicle detectors based on the magnetic sensor, and our proposed vehicle detection method is also
based on threshold-based algorithm.
In general, the drivers need to spend about 10–180 s to park vehicles into the roadside parking
space and about 5–120 s to drive the vehicles out of the parking spaces. According to the Nyquist
Theorem, if the sampling rate is above 0.2 Hz, the magnetic disturbance signals generated by the
vehicle can be captured. Although the faster sampling rate can extract more rich magnetic signal
characteristics information, it also means more energy is needed. Similarly, if the sampling rate is too
low, the vehicle detector may not be able to capture the enough data feature of the magnetic signals,
resulting in making a wrong decision on the status of the vehicle. In order to achieve a good trade-oﬀ
between the power consumption and detection accuracy of wireless vehicle detector, the magnetic
sensor sampling rate SRm used in our proposed method is 1 Hz.
According to Figure 5a2, we can divide the implementation of our proposed method into
the following steps: Data preprocessing, Fluctuation Detection, Magnetism-Based Method Design,
RF-Based Method Design and Two Methods Fusion Design.
3.4.1. Data Preprocessing
The principle of the magnetism-based method is that only when the magnetic signals are large
enough and last long enough, it will be determined as a vehicle arrival point. Similarly, the vehicle
leave point is reached when the changes in magnetic signals are smaller than a threshold for a while [21].
Therefore, two windows, arrival detection sliding window and leaving detection sliding window, are
used to check whether this criterions are met, and we have created a circular queue in the RAM of the
low-power microcontroller to store the sampled magnetic data {m(i), m(i + 1),... m(i + Lmax− 1)} and
the queue length:
Lmax = max(Le, Ll, Lv) = max(We/SRm, Wl/SRm, Wv/SRm), (3)
where Lmax is the maximum length of the circular queue, SRm is the sampling rate of the magnetic
sensor. Le and Ll are the vehicle entering and leaving detection sliding window length respectively,
We and Wl are the vehicle entering and leaving detection sliding window respectively and measure
in units of second. Wv is the ﬂuctuation calculation window and Lv is the length of data ﬂuctuation
calculation window, and the unit of Wv is second too. The values of these parameters will be described
in detail below.
3.4.2. Fluctuation Detection
From Figure 4, we can see that the magnetic signals change drastically when a vehicle enters and
leaves the parking space, and remain relatively stable when the vehicle is parked, so we can achieve
the vehicle detection result by extracting the magnetic signal characteristics when the vehicle is parked
in the parking space. Hence, we introduce a magnetic signal ﬂuctuation detection mechanism in our
proposed method, and the magnetism-based method is activated when the magnetic signal ﬂuctuation
is detected. We use the variance calculation algorithm to achieve the magnetic signals ﬂuctuation
detection result, and the data ﬂuctuation calculation window Wv is 10 s in our proposed method:
F(k) =


∑n
i=n−Lv+1|m|i|− Bm|k||
Lv
> Tml

, (4)

===== PAGE 10 =====

Sensors 2019, 19, 2348 10 of 16
where k is the serial number of sampling point. Lv is the length of data ﬂuctuation calculation window.
Bm(n) is the current reference baseline of magnetism-based method.Tml is the vehicle leaving threshold
of magnetism-based vehicle detection method. F(k) is the binarized ﬂuctuation detection result, the
value changes from 0 to 1 indicating that a vehicle is entering or leaving the parking space. When
F(k) = 1, the value of F(k) will be latched and cleared only when the status of the parking space
changes. Equation (4) will only be executed until the circular queue has been ﬁlled.
3.4.3. Magnetism-Based Method Design
From Figure 2a, we can ﬁnd that the magnetic signals are easily a ﬀected by adjacent moving
vehicles, which may cause the vehicle state to be misjudged. In order to reduce the false detection
probability caused by the interference from the adjacent moving vehicles, two detection windows
shown in Figure 6 are introduced: vehicle entering detection sliding window We and vehicle leaving
detection sliding window Wl. Through the analysis of the general driver parking habits before, the
vehicle entering detection sliding window We size is 180 s and the vehicle leaving detection sliding
window Wl size is 120 s in our proposed method.
Figure 6. The implementation of sliding window algorithm for our method.
As described above, the magnetism-based method is activated to detect the vehicle status when
the magnetic signals change drastically. Therefore, the value of the starting point i of the sliding
window is equal to k in Equation (4). Here we deﬁne three signal states in vehicle detection process:
0, 1 and uncertain state. 0 means no vehicle exists on the parking space and 1 represents there is a
vehicle on the parking space respectively, and the uncertain state indicates that the magnetism-based
method cannot make an accurate decision on the vehicle status. The magnetism-based method can be
expressed as:
M(n) =
{
G{n, F{k = 1,
unchange, F{k = 0. (5)
where F(k) is magnetic signal ﬂuctuation detection result, M(n) is the vehicle detection result of the
magnetism-based method, the value changes from 0 to 1 indicating that a vehicle has been parked on
the parking space and vice versa. G(n) can be obtained by the following formula:
G(n) =

1,∀i∈{n− Le + 1, n− Le + 2,... , n|m|i|− Bm|n||> Tmh,
0,∀i∈{n− Ll + 1, n− Ll + 2,... , n|m|i|− Bm|n||≤ Tml,
Uncertain state, otherwise.
(6)
where n is the serial number of sampling point. m(i) is magnetic data value stored in the circular
queue. Bm(n) is the current reference baseline of magnetic signals. Tmh and Tml are the vehicle entry
and departure decision threshold respectively. Equation (6) will only be executed until the circular
queue has been ﬁlled.
However, according to Equation (6), the magnetism-based method will enter an uncertain state
when the amount of change in magnetic signals is between Tmh and Tml, which may be caused by the
magnetic signal dead zone problem or the interference from adjacent vehicles. Therefore, we introduce

===== PAGE 11 =====

Sensors 2019, 19, 2348 11 of 16
an RF-based vehicle detection method for further detection to solve the afore mentioned uncertainty
problem caused by the magnetism-based vehicle detection method. Similarly, the RF-based vehicle
detection method is also based on the threshold comparison principle.
3.4.4. RF-Based Method Design
Since the received signal strength data may be aﬀected by environmental conditions, in order to
eliminate the noise interference and improve the data reliability, we will continuously perform three
wireless data interactions at intervals of one second to obtain six sets of wireless signal strength data
when the RF-based method is activated. The RF-based method can expressed as follows:
R(n) =
{
1,
⏐⏐⏐Arss|n|− Brss|n|
⏐⏐⏐> Trss,
0,
⏐⏐⏐Arss|n|− Brss|n|
⏐⏐⏐≤ Trss. (7)
where Arss(n) is the average value of the six sets of wireless signal strength data which generated by
the WVD and WAP during three wireless data interactions. Trss is the decision threshold of RF-based
vehicle detection method. R(n) is the vehicle detection result, the value changes from 0 to 1 indicating
that there is a vehicle in the parking space and vice versa.
3.4.5. Two Methods Fusion Design
According to the data sheets of wireless transceivers, under the condition of 3.6 V supply voltage
of our evaluated circuit board, we can ﬁnd that the transmit current can reach 150 mA when using
CC2530 and CC2592, while the transmit current is about 30 mA when the CC1101 is used. Hence, if
the transceiver module is activated all the time, the battery energy will be quickly depleted. In order to
maximize the service lives of the WVDs, the proposed method utilizes the low power consumption
magnetic sensor with 0.1 mA working current to trigger RF-based method to work under certain
conditions to realize the detection of roadside parking space status. Through the above analysis, our
proposed vehicle detection method for roadside SPMS based on the fusion of received signal strengths
and magnetic signals can be expressed by following formula:
D(n) =
{
M{n,{F{n , Uncertain state ,
R{n, otherwises. (8)
where D(n) is the vehicle detection result of our proposed method. According to Equation (8), the
RF-based vehicle detection method is only activated when the magnetism-based vehicle detection
method enters an uncertain state, otherwise the wireless transceiver module remains in sleep mode.
According to the above analysis, the implementation block diagram of the proposed fusion vehicle
detection method as shown in Figure 5b.
3.5. Adaptive Adjustment Algorithm for Reference Baselines
From Figure 5b we can see that the appropriate thresholds and reference values are the key
parameters that determine the performance of our proposed method. The selection of three thresholds
we have discussed above, this section will discuss the calculation algorithm for the reference values.
3.5.1. Magnetism-Based Method Reference Background Calculation
Since the magnetic signals are easily aﬀected by environmental factors such as temperature, which
cause the reference background to drift and aﬀect the vehicle detection accuracy. In this paper, we use
the following weighted average method to update the reference background value:
Bm(n) =
{
Bm{n− 1∗{1−α +α∗ m{n, D{n = 0∩ F{n = 0,
Bm{n− 1 ,otherwise. (9)

===== PAGE 12 =====

Sensors 2019, 19, 2348 12 of 16
where n is the serial number of sampling point. Where α is a weighting coeﬃcient and the value is
0.05 in our proposed method. Bm(n) and Bm(n− 1) are the current and previous reference baseline
of magnetic signals respectively. m(n) is the current collected magnetic data on Z-axis. According to
Equation (9), the reference background only be updated when no vehicle exists in the parking space
and the magnetic signal is stable. Otherwise, it will remain unchanged.
3.5.2. RF-Based Method Reference Background Calculation
The RF-based method, as same as the magnetism-based method, requires an adaptively adjusted
background reference. In the roadside SPMS, the WVDs and WAPs will exchange heartbeat packets
periodically for maintaining the network infrastructure after the accomplishment of wireless sensor
network deployment. As a result, the RSSs can be generated by the WVDs and WAPs during the
periodic heartbeat packet data interaction, which can be used to calculate the background reference of
RF-based method. We also use the weighted average method to update the RF-based method reference
background value:
Brss(n) =
{
Brss{n− 1∗{1−α +α∗ Arss{n, D{n = 0∩ F{n = 0
Brss{n− 1 ,otherwise. (10)
Where n is the serial number of sampling point. Where α is a weighting coeﬃcient and the value is
0.05 in our proposed method. Brss(n) and Brss(n− 1) are the current and previous reference baseline of
RF-based method respectively. Arss(n) is the average of the received signal strength generated by the
WVD and the WAP during the periodic heartbeat packet data interactions.
4. Results
In order to evaluate the performance of our proposed vehicle detection method, we designed
several vehicle detector prototypes with the method proposed in the paper and installed them in an
actual roadside parking lot. The vehicle detector prototypes were installed in the center of the parking
spaces. The experiments were conducted on the Pingcheng Road, Jiading, Shanghai, China.
4.1. Experimental Results
Through above analysis, due to the amount of change in the magnetic signals caused by the dead
zone of vehicles is basically same as that aﬀected by the non-standard parking vehicle on the adjacent
parking space, which may cause the magnetism-based method to make a wrong judgement on the
status of the parking space. In addition, the magnetic signal dead zone problem is particularly obvious
in the high-chassis vehicles, such as SUVs, MPVs and pickups, etc. Therefore, we chose three types
of vehicles to evaluate the reliability of the proposed method. The three types of vehicles were: a
Volkswagen Santana 2000 sedan, a Suzuki Alto mini car, and a Honda CR-V sports utility vehicle.
From Figure 4b, we can ﬁnd that when one or more vehicles exist between the evaluated WVD
and the WAP , the higher the WAP antenna, the greater the radio energy attenuation. Considering the
feasibility of construction, the installation height of the WAP antenna is 6 m in our experiment. In
order to evaluate algorithm performance at diﬀerent distances, two WVD prototypes were installed in
the actual parking spaces. One was installed in the parking space which is about 100 m away from the
WAP , and the other was installed in the parking space where is about 50 m away from the WAP .
We all know that diﬀerent drivers have diﬀerent driving habits. In order to evaluate the robustness
of our proposed method, we chose three drivers with di ﬀerent driving ages to participate in our
experiments. Moreover, we conducted the experiments in three cases as shown in Figure 3b, which
were: no vehicle on both front and behind, one or more vehicles on the behind, one or more vehicles
on both left and right. And the activation numbers of the RF-based detection method were record in
our experiments to evaluate the energy consumption of the proposed method, the results are listed in
Table 2.

===== PAGE 13 =====

Sensors 2019, 19, 2348 13 of 16
Table 2. Vehicle detection accuracy of our proposed method.
Case
Actual
Number
Detected
Number
RF-Based Method
Activated Number
Detection
Accuracy
50 m 100 m 50 m 100 m 50 m 100 m 50 m 100 m
no vehicle on both front and behind 199 175 199 174 15 18 100% 99.42%
some vehicles on the behind 202 195 201 195 21 18 99.50% 100%
some vehicles on both front and behind 188 169 187 168 17 15 99.46% 99.46%
overall 589 539 587 537 53 51 99.66% 99.62%
From Table 2 we can ﬁnd that the vehicle detection accuracy of our proposed method has exceeded
99.62% when the magnetic sensor sampling rate is 1 Hz. In general, the higher detection accuracy not
only reduces the frequency of wireless transmission, but also improves the management eﬃciency of
roadside parking lots.
From Table 2, we can also ﬁnd that the activation probability of RF-based vehicle detection
method in the vehicle detection accuracy evaluation process is about 9.2%. As described above, the
magnetism-based vehicle detection algorithm will enter an uncertain state when the RF-based vehicle
detection method is activated. The uncertain state may be caused by the interference from adjacent
vehicles, or it may be caused by that the sensing range of the vehicle detector is just in the dead zone of
the vehicle which has been parked on the current parking space. Therefore, it is very diﬃcult for the
magnetism-based vehicle detection method to make an accurate decision on the current parking space
status under this situation. In other words, if the WVD equipped with the single magnetism-based
vehicle detection method, the guaranteed detection accuracy of the WVD used in the roadside SPMS
is only 90.8%. Therefore, compared with the single magnetism-based vehicle detection method, our
proposed fusion vehicle detection method improves the detection accuracy by about 9.2%. So that the
proposed vehicle detection method is very applicable to the roadside SPMS application.
4.2. Power Consumption Analysis
For battery-powered WVDs, lower average power consumption means longer service time, as a
result, the evaluation of the power consumption characteristics has a guiding signiﬁcance for battery
selection. To calculate the average energy consumption of the proposed method, we need to know the
average working current and duration of each activity performed:
E = I∗ VDD∗ t, (11)
where E is the total energy consumption and the unit is mWh. I is the average working current and
measure in unit of mA. VDD is the power supply voltage and the value is 3.6 V in our circuit board. t is
duration of each activity performed and the units are hours:

Eday = Esleep + Esensor + Er f + Emcu active ,
Esensor = Isensor∗ VDD∗ tsensor∗ 24∗ 3600∗ SRm,
Ir f avr = Ir f trans∗ tr f trans + Ir f recv∗ tr f recv ,
Er f = Ir f avr∗ VDD∗ {(1 + Trss∗ prss∗ vnum + HBnum).
(12)
where Eday and Esleep are the total energy consumption and standby energy consumption of a day
respectively. Esensor, Er f and Emcu active are the working energy consumption of the magnetic sensor,
wireless transceiver and microcontroller respectively. vnum is the total number of vehicles detected
during a day. The other main parameters’ deﬁnitions and values are listed in Table 3. Because the
microcontroller spends most of its time in sleep mode, only the magnetic sensor reading and writing
operations, wireless data transmission and reception operations will wake up the microcontroller.
Hence, we measured Emcu active together with the above several operations.

===== PAGE 14 =====

Sensors 2019, 19, 2348 14 of 16
Table 3. Time duration and current consumption for each activity of the proposed method.
Parameters Description Value
Imcu sleep MCU standby current 1 µA
Isensor sleep Magnetic sensor standby current 1 µA
Ir f sleep CC2530 or CC1101 standby current 1 µA
Isensor
Magnetic sensor average operating current when the number of circuit
oscillation cycles of the chip is 128 0.1 mA
tsensor
Magnetic sensor operating time when the clock of sensor runs at
nominally 32 MHz 1 ms
prss Activation probability of RF-based method according to Table 2 9.2%
Trss Received signal strength sampling times by the RF-based method 3
Ir f trans CC1101 or CC2530 average transmit current 30 or 154 mA
tr f trans
CC1101 or CC2530 wireless data transmission time when data length is
32 bytes, and the data rates are both 250 kbps 2 ms
Ir f recv CC1101 or CC2530 average operating current in receive mode 18 or 30 mA
HBnum
Number of heartbeat packets per day, and the heartbeat packet
transmission period of wireless vehicle detector is 5 minutes. 288
tr f recv Wireless data reception window length 500 ms
In order to estimate the average power consumption of each activity, we connected a 10 ohm
resistor between a battery with the voltage of 3.6 V and the current board of vehicle detector prototypes,
and used an oscilloscope to measure the voltage across the resistor and the duration of each activity.
Hence, we can calculate the average power consumption of each activity by Ohm’s law and integral
principle based on the voltage and duration obtained by the oscilloscope. Because the standby power
consumption of the microcontroller is relatively low, we used a six-and-a-half digital multimeter
Keysight 34465A to measure the standby power consumption of the microcontroller.
The battery used in our vehicle detector prototype is ER34615M, which has an open circuit voltage
of 3.6 V and a nominal capacity of 15,000 mAh. For the sake of simplicity, we assume that there is no
retransmission in the wireless data interaction processes. With the above parameters, we can clearly
get the total daily energy consumption of our proposed method and the proportion of the total daily
energy consumption that consumed by the magnetic sensor as shown in Figure 7.
Figure 7. The relationship between the proportion of total energy consumed by the magnetic sensor and
the number of vehicles detected per day , and the relationship between the WVD service years and the
number of vehicles detected per day . (a) The proportion of the total energy consumed by the magnetic
sensor in the two WVD prototypes with the radio frequency of 433 MHz and 2.4 GHz when the sampling
rate of the magnetic sensor is 1 Hz. (b) The proportion of the total energy consumed by the magnetic sensor
in the two WVD prototypes when the sampling rate of the magnetic sensor is 10 Hz. (c) The nominal
serviceable years of the two prototypes when the sampling rate of the magnetic sensor is 1 Hz. (d) The
nominal serviceable years of the two prototypes when the sampling rate of the magnetic sensor is 10 Hz.

===== PAGE 15 =====

Sensors 2019, 19, 2348 15 of 16
From Figure 7a,b, we can see that the energy consumption of the magnetic sensor accounts for
a large proportion of the total energy consumption. In other words, the total energy consumption
increases rapidly with the improvement of the magnetic sensor sampling rate, and vice versa. In
summary, the above experiment results show that if the sampling rate of the magnetic sensor is reduced,
the total energy consumption of the vehicle detector can be greatly reduced, so that the service life of
vehicle detectors can be extended.
From Table 2, we can know that when the magnetic sensor sampling rate is 1 Hz, the vehicle
detection accuracy is basically the same as the experimental results of the machine-learning-based
vehicle detection method proposed in literature [ 12] (99.62% vs. 99.85%). However, the magnetic
sensor sampling rate of the algorithm proposed in literature [12] is 10 Hz. From Figure 7b,d we can see
that if the battery used in the WVDs in [ 12] is consistent with ours, their working life was no more
than 2 years, while the working life of ours can exceed 10 years as shown in Figure 7c, therefore, our
proposed vehicle detection method is very suitable for engineering application practice.
5. Conclusions
In the paper, the vehicle detection method based on the fusion of the magnetic signals and the
received signal strengths is proposed. The proposed method does not require any modiﬁcation on the
hardware of wireless vehicle detectors and only requires some adjustments on the embedded software
of wireless vehicle detectors, so the cost of the vehicle detector is not increased.
In addition, two types of wireless vehicle detector prototypes with di ﬀerent radio frequencies
have been designed and implemented. Then, we have installed and evaluated the wireless vehicle
detector prototypes with our proposed method in the real parking spaces. The experimental results
show that the vehicle detection accuracy of our proposed method can exceed 99% when the magnetic
sensor sampling rate is 1 Hz. Moreover, the energy consumption of our proposed method has been
measured and estimated at last, compared with machine-learning-based vehicle detection methods,
our method has achieved a good compromise between detection accuracy and power consumption,
and it is very suitable for the battery-powered WVDs.
The lower sensor sampling rate means the lower energy consumption. However, we only evaluate
the performance of the proposed method with 1 Hz magnetic sensor sampling rate in the paper. In
order to extend the service life and improve the vehicle detection accuracy of WVDs as much as
possible, in the future work, we need to build a mathematical model between power consumption,
vehicle detection accuracy, sampling rate of magnetic sensor and wireless transceiver. As a result, we
can choose an optimal combination of sensor sampling rates through the model according to parking
habits of general drivers, and WVDs can achieve a good compromise between the power consumption
and performance.
Author Contributions: Data curation, Y.J.; Funding acquisition, Y.X.; Investigation, L.L.; Software, L.L.;
Supervision, J.Z. and Y.X.; Writing—original draft, L.L.; Writing—review & editing, L.L.
Funding: This research was supported by the Science and Technology Service Network Project of Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Science and Technology Innovation Action Plan Project of Shanghai Science and Technology
Commission under Grant 17511105602.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Pham, T.N.; Tsai, M.-F.; Nguyen, D.B.; Dow, C.-R.; Deng, D.-J. A Cloud-Based Smart-Parking System Based
on Internet-of-Things Technologies. IEEE Access 2015, 3, 1581–1591. [CrossRef]
2. Kotb, A.O.; Shen, Y.-C.; Huang, Y. Smart Parking Guidance, Monitoring and Reservations: A Review.
IEEE Intell. T ransp. Syst. Mag. 2017, 9, 6–16. [CrossRef]
3. Marszalek, Z.; Zeglen, T.; Sroka, R.; Gajda, J. Inductive Loop Axle Detector based on Resistance and Reactance
Vehicle Magnetic Proﬁles. Sensors 2018, 18, 2376. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

===== PAGE 16 =====

Sensors 2019, 19, 2348 16 of 16
4. Youngtae, J.; Inbum, J. Analysis of Vehicle Detection with WSN-Based Ultrasonic Sensors. Sensors 2014, 14,
14050–14069.
5. Lirong, L.; Yunmei, Z.; Shanshan, L.; Chen, Y.; Tianqi, L.; Xinyuan, X. Design of intelligent infrared vehicle
detect system based on ZigBee. In Proceedings of the 2015 Chinese Automation Congress (CAC), Wuhan,
China, 27–29 November 2015; pp. 1845–1849.
6. Shih, S.-E.; Tsa, W.-H. A convenient vision-based system for automatic detection of parking spaces in indoor
parking lots using wide-angle cameras. IEEE T rans. Veh. T echnol.2014, 63, 2521–2532. [CrossRef]
7. Huang, C.; Lu, R.; Lin, X.; Shen, X. Secure Automated Valet Parking: A Privacy-Preserving Reservation
Scheme for Autonomous Vehicles. IEEE T rans. Veh. T echnol.2018, 67, 11169–11180. [CrossRef]
8. Wang, X.; Xu, L.; Sun, H.; Xin, J.; Zheng, N. On-road vehicle detection and tracking using MMW radar and
mono vision fusion. IEEE T rans. Intell. T ransp. Syst. 2016, 17, 2075–2084. [CrossRef]
9. Trigona, C.; Andò, B.; Sinatra, V .; Vacirca, C.; Rossino, E.; Palermo, L.; Kurukunda, S.; Baglio, S. Implementation
and characterization of a smart parking system based on 3-axis magnetic sensors. In Proceedings of the 2016
IEEE International Instrumentation and Measurement Technology Conference, Taipei, Taiwan, 23–26 May
2016; pp. 1–6.
10. Zhang, Z.; Tao, M.; Yuan, H. A parking occupancy detection algorithm based on AMR sensor. IEEE Sens. J.
2015, 15, 1261–1269. [CrossRef]
11. Jian, W.; Bin, X. Design and veriﬁcation of parking space detection based on AMR sensor. In Proceedings of
the 2017 4th International Conference on Transportation Information and Safety (ICTIS), Banﬀ, AB, Canada,
8–10 August 2017; pp. 968–973.
12. Zhu, H.; Feng, S.; Yu, F. Parking Detection Method Based on Finite-State Machine and Collaborative
Decision-Making. IEEE Sens. J. 2018, 18, 9829–9839. [CrossRef]
13. Zhu, H.; Yu, F. A Vehicle Parking Detection Method Based on Correlation of Magnetic Signals. Int. J. Distrib.
Sens. Netw. 2015, 11, 1–13. [CrossRef]
14. Zhang, Z.; Li, X.; Yuan, H.; Yu, F. A street parking system using wireless sensor networks.Int. J. Distrib. Sens.
Netw. 2013, 9, 1–10. [CrossRef]
15. Dong, H.; Wang, X.; Zhang, C.; He, R.; Jia, L.; Qin, Y. Improved Robust Vehicle Detection and Identiﬁcation
Based on Single Magnetic Sensor. IEEE Access 2018, 6, 5247–5255. [CrossRef]
16. Sifuentes, E.; Casas, O.; Pallas-Areny, R. Wireless Magnetic Sensor Node for Vehicle Detection with Optical
Wake-Up. IEEE Sens. J. 2011, 11, 1669–1676. [CrossRef]
17. Hostettler, R.; Djuric, P .M. Vehicle Tracking Based on Fusion of Magnetometer and Accelerometer Sensor
Measurements with Particle Filtering. IEEE T rans. Veh. T echnol.2015, 64, 1. [CrossRef]
18. Al-Husseiny, A.; Youssef, M. RF-Based Traﬃc Detection and Identiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the 2012 IEEE
Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC Fall), Quebec City, QC, Canada, 3–6 September 2012; pp. 1–5.
19. Kassem, N.; Kosba, A.E.; Youssef, M. RF-Based Vehicle Detection and Speed Estimation. In Proceedings of
the 2012 IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC Spring), Yokohama, Japan, 6–9 May 2012; pp. 1–5.
20. Kumar, D.P .; Amgoth, T.; Annavarapu, C.S.R. Machine learning algorithms for wireless sensor networks:
A survey. Inf. Fusion 2019, 49, 1–25. [CrossRef]
21. Kavitha, M.G.; Sendhilnathan, S. Hidden and exposed nodes in wireless sensor networks.Adv. Nat. Appl. Sci.
2017, 11, 402–408.
22. Markevicius, V .; Navikas, D.; Zilys, M.; Andriukaitis, D.; Valinevicius, A.; Cepenas, M. Dynamic vehicle
detection via the use of magnetic ﬁeld sensors. Sensors 2016, 16, 78. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23. Bao, X.; Li, H.; Xu, D.; Jia, L.; Ran, B.; Rong, J. Tra ﬃc Vehicle Counting in Jam Flow Conditions Using
Low-Cost and Energy-Eﬃcient Wireless Magnetic Sensors. Sensors 2016, 16, 1868. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24. FRIIS Transmission Equation. Available online: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Friis_transmission_equation
(accessed on 5 January 2019).
25. Log-Distance Path Loss Model. Available online: https: //en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Log-distance_path_loss_
model (accessed on 5 January 2019).
© 2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).