

===== PAGE 1 =====

 
 
714  Vol. 11, October 2013 
  
 
 
A Survey of Intelligent Car Parking System 
 
Faheem1*, S.A. Mahmud1, G.M. Khan1, M. Rahman1 and H. Zafar2 
 
1 Center for Intelligent Systems and Networks Research, 
University of Engineering and Technology, Peshawar, Pakistan 
2 Department of Computer Systems Engineering, 
University of Engineering and Technology, Peshawar, Pakistan 
* fahim.zafari@nwfpuet.edu.pk 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
The industrialization of the world, increase in population, slow paced city development and mismanagement of the 
available parking space has resulted in parking related problems. There is a dire need for a secure, intelligent, efficient 
and reliable system which can be used for searching the unoccupied parking facility, guidance towards the parking 
facility, negotiation of the parking fee, along with the pr oper management of the parking facility. Intelligent Parking 
Service is a part of Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS ). This paper reviews different Intelligent Parking Services 
used for parking guidance, parking facility management and gives an insight into the economic analysis of such projects. 
The discussed systems will be able to reduce the problems which are arising due to unavailability of a reliable, efficient 
and modern parking system, while the economic analysis technique will help in analyzing the projects' feasibility. 
 
Keywords: Intelligent Transportation Systems, Fuzzy Logic, Wireless Networks. 
 
RESUMEN 
 
La industrialización del mundo, el aumento de población, el desarrollo de la ciudad de ritmo lento y la mala gestión 
del espacio de aparcamiento disponible ha dado lugar a problemas relacionados con el aparcamiento. Hay una gran 
necesidad de un sistema seguro, inteligent e, eficiente y confiable que se puede utilizar para buscar el aparcamiento 
desocupada, la orientación hacia el aparca miento, la negociación de la tarifa de aparcamiento, así como la correcta 
gestión de las instalaciones de aparcamiento. Servicio de Estacionamiento Inteligente es una parte de los Sistemas 
Inteligentes de Transporte (ITS). Este artículo revisa lo s diferentes Servicios de estacionamiento inteligentes 
utilizados para la guía, Aparcamiento ge stión de instalaciones y da una idea del análisis económico de este tipo de 
proyectos. Los sistemas descritos podrán reducir los prob lemas que están surgiendo debido a la falta de un sistema 
de aparcamiento fiable, eficiente y moderna, mientras que la técnica de análisis económico nos ayudará en el análisis 
de viabilidad de los proyectos. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
The industrial growth of the world is reflected by 
the increase in the number of automobiles on the 
streets throughout the world [1], which has caused 
a lot of parking related problems. The slow paced 
city planning has increased the problem even more 
[2]. The search for the parking space is a time 
consuming process which not only affects the 
economic activities’ efficiency, but also the social 
interactions and cost [3]. Network companies 
cannot provide updated information of the parking 
facilities on the internet as the parking facilities do 
not cooperate with the companies. Certain big cars 
are not able to fit into the normally available 
parking spaces. Hence there is a need for a 
system; which can take all relevant information into 
consideration, for finding the parking vacancy.  
 
 
Human errors are the major source of traffic 
accidents, therefore building in-car technologies for 
checking the parking lot, avoiding accidents and 
guidance to the parking fac ility is turning out to be 
an integral area for research. The objective of such 
technologies is the reduction of the burden on 
driver, improvement of the traffic capacity, and 
provision of reliable and secure car functions [4].  
 
The parking meters which rely on coins or tokens is 
an inefficient system as it requires man power for 
management of the parking and exact change for 
paying the parking charges [2]. Parking control and 
enforcement systems provide efficient and effective 
monitoring of meter and it also keeps a check on 
any violations of the parking lot. This results in best 

===== PAGE 2 =====

 
A Survey of Intelligent Car Parking System, Faheem et al. / 714‐726
Journal of Applied Research and Technology 715
possible use of the parking space for increasing the 
revenue. However, it requires man power which 
needs some capital [5]. Currently used parking 
system is not an efficient  one; as the drivers are 
allowed to park without any restriction [6], and the 
parking facility cannot be used to its full extent. 
 
The Intelligent Parking service, a part of Intelligent 
Transportation System (ITS), gives rise to different 
parking facilities on the basis of new functions they 
provide. This service not only manages the internal 
operations of the parking fa cility, but it is also 
designed to work with different aspects related to 
the parking facility.  
 
The services which the Intelligent Parking System 
should provide in the future are  
 
 The parking availability information system and 
parking reservation system should provide 
advanced navigation services. 
 
 The mobile electric commerce system and a 
continuously working gate system should collect 
the toll charges electrically.  
 
 An automated navigation system should assist in 
safe driving. 
 
 An in-facility navigat ion system should provide 
the best possible traffic management. 
 
 Provision of effective security for the safety of cars. 
 
 Provision of strong functions for facilitating 
administrators and managers in management of 
the parking facility.  
 
The information related to the availability of 
unoccupied lot; before the driver enters the facility 
is provided by the parkin g availability information 
system. An empty parking lot can be reserved by 
the driver through the park ing reservation system. 
The continuous entry and exit system facilitates a 
driver by getting rid of time consuming processes 
such as getting a ticket, and the freedom of 
selecting any payment method. The in-facility 
navigation system is used for finding the vacant lot 
and then guiding the driver to that parking space.  
 
Further modifications result in even better systems, 
such as reserving the parking space online and 
using a smart card with it will help the driver find 
the destination quickly, safely and easily. Despite 
the system requiring no man power, it will still be 
able to know about the entrance and exit of the 
vehicles as well as the occupancy rate of the 
facility. These systems will also decrease the traffic 
congestion as the number of vehicles parked on 
the street will decrease. These new systems will 
boost the parking business by the increase in the 
number of customers [7].  
 
The modern development in technology has also 
resulted in In-vehicle advanced information 
systems, which is the standard equipment in the 
expensive and luxurious cars. These systems 
consist of cell phones, electronic maps and 
satellites for navigating the real time situations of 
road through wireless technologies.  
 
The latest advancement in intelligent parking 
service is the parking space negotiation system 
which is much different than the parking information 
system. Parking space negotiation system uses the 
linking and integration of the parking facilities which 
results in negotiation and coordinates between the 
in-vehicle information sy stem and parking facility. 
This system initializes the negotiation process for 
the parking charges, the advance reservation of the 
parking lot, search for the best possible path from 
the current position to the parking facility and then to 
the destination. Coordination work is an important 
task for the negotiation corporation. Negotiation is 
just like a business where both sellers and buyers 
decide the terms of business, for getting the best 
possible deal for both parties.  
 
The parking information system along with the 
parking space negotiation system laid the 
foundation for the intelligent parking service and it 
can counter all the traffic related issues working 
hand in hand with each other. 
 
The rest of paper comprises of various methods 
used for designing an intelligent parking service 
and will provide an insight into the methodology of 
economic analysis for such system. 
 
2. Various techniques proposed for an 
intelligent car parking system 
 
Some of the most relevant techniques for realizing an 
effective Intelligent Parking System are summarized 
in this section.  

===== PAGE 3 =====

 
 
A Survey of Intelligent Car Parking System, Faheem et al. / 714‐726
Vol. 11, October 2013 716 
2.1 Expert systems 
 
Expert Systems or Agent based technologies can 
solve the problems associated with distributed and 
complex traffic environment. They are also 
considered to be the main weapon for laying the 
foundation of automation mechanism for the 
Parking Negotiation and Guidance System [8].  
Agent has beneficial traits like autonomy, reactivity, 
adaptability, proactivity and social ability which can 
be used for solving problems having highly dynamic 
and interactive behaviors [9]. 
 
Multi-Agent system is a modeling technique. It is 
used for representation of system with elements 
which show intelligence, autonomy, and degree of 
interaction either with each other or with 
environment [10]. Mobile agents can move within 
the nodes of a network and are made dynamically 
during the runtime. They are sent to destination 
systems for performing different tasks with the up 
to date code and algorithm. Mobile agents also 
result in reduction of data transmission over the 
networks. It enhances t he system ductility, 
adjustability and perdurability [11]. 
 
Some systems do not provide the best possible 
parking facility as they do not take the parking fee 
into consideration. In the absence of the negotiation 
on the parking fee, the consumers loose the 
opportunity of finding a cheaper and better parking 
place [8]. So the negotiable margin on the parking 
price has to be taken into consideration for making a 
decision, through the Intelligent Agent System which 
has to select the best possible parking facility for the 
driver as described in [3]. The agents are able to 
plan, move, perform, check and coordinate for 
performing their tasks. For the provision of a 
bargaining platform for the user; an intelligent parking 
negotiation and guidance system, which integrates 
the mobile agent with multi-system is proposed in [9]. 
Mobile agent can be used for an active, stable and 
quick negotiation between cars and parking facilities. 
The movement of the agent helps in shorter 
negotiation time and decreases the amount of data to 
be transmitted over the wireless network. They also 
present an algorithm for negotiation, which is similar 
to the negotiations of humans. 
 
A multi-agent system called agent-based intelligent 
parking negotiation and guidance system 
(ABIPNGS) combines mobile agent technology 
with multi-agent systems and utilizes both 
stationary and mobile ag ents. The utilization of 
agents in transportation systems are discussed in 
details in the literature [8, 12-15]. 
 
A multi-phase navigation technique which relies 
on two-layer traffic map is used for parking routes 
negotiation and direction in [16]. The system 
implementation takes place on an extended FIPA 
architecture through mobile agent, message 
queue, agent container and agent execution 
environment. It utilizes the interoperability of FIPA 
standards and ductility of mobile agents. Through 
the brilliance, adjustability, and co-action of 
agents, the entire service environment can 
automatically perform the search for the park, 
bargain the parking fee, book the parking lot, 
negotiate the parking rout and direct to the facility. 
Distributed active parking guidance information 
system (APGIS) is discussed in [16]. It supports 
both the stationary and mobile agent along with 
automatic execution of searching for park, 
negotiating the parking fee, booking of the 
parking lot and directions of the parking route 
without intervening the drivers and parks  
 
The distributed intelligent motion control of 
mobile robots is discussed in [17]. It also 
presents a multi-functio nal agent system called 
intelligent system for au tonomous robots, which 
deals with modeling, planning and coordination 
functions of a mobile robot.  The system is made 
up of main control kernel agent, a learning 
navigation agent for safe trajectory generation, 
and allowing the robot to move towards a 
restricted environment goal. For learning and 
keeping successful motion of the robot, an 
adaptive neutral algorithm is utilized. The third 
agent is concerned with positioning of the robot 
as well as updating the map for the robot. The 
fourth agent deals with communication, handling 
and coordination tasks. Fuzzy maneuvering and 
Parking Agent, deals with the tasks of parking 
and movement. A fuzzy maneuvering and 
Parking agent is concerned with the movement 
and parking tasks. For outdoor mobile robot 
navigation, a multi-agent system with event-
driven control approach was adapted in [18]. For 
the sake of fusion of information and mapping of 
environment, [19,20] propose a distributed multi-
agent system. Figure 1 shows the ABIPNGS 
organization model. 

===== PAGE 4 =====

 
A Survey of Intelligent Car Parking System, Faheem et al. / 714‐726
Journal of Applied Research and Technology 717
2.2 Fuzzy logic based systems 
 
If there is a process resulting from the human 
error, then a system which supports the operator; 
safely and efficiently is presented in [21]. The 
system works by 
 
 Detecting 
 
 Motion Planning, and 
 
 Supplying information 
 
Fuzzy theory is used for building the support 
knowledge and heuristics of the high-level expert 
human. The method discussed in [4] gives a car 
the capability to independent ly drive on different 
types of roads. It also envisions movements like 
reverse, parallel parking and three point turns.  For 
automatically getting a functioning car control 
system, this approach uses  a self-training system 
which benefits from human skills. 
 
For the sake of training and testing, a car driving 
simulator is combined with the GenSoYager Fuzzy 
Neural Network.  For replicating the built in 
vagueness of the availabl e information, a Fuzzy 
Control System is chosen. Then the implementation 
of the Fuzzy rule-based system takes place upon 
the neural network architecture. It is the main 
reason for learning, recalling, generalizing and 
adapting from the training data. The Neuro-fuzzy 
system has the ability to reason like human beings 
as well as it has expert knowledge.  
 
For reduction of the calculation time, an FPGA 
based fuzzy logic controller (FLC) is presented in 
[22]. FLC can be utilized for designing an automatic 
car back parallel which has FPGA based controller.  
[23] gives a fuzzy approach for control of backward 
movement of truck and trailer in dynamic 
environment. This method is then broadened to 
condition in which truck’s pathway has obstacles. In 
the first case, we assume stationary obstacles. The 
second condition is mobile obstacles which can 
make the truck directed to the parking facility. 
Ultrasonic and 3D vision sensors can be used for 
identifying proper parking space for parallel parking. 
The parking is completed due to the intelligence of 
fuzzy logic, after the driv er confirms it. Ultrasonic 
sensor identifies objects and obstacles longitudinally. 
A two-stage scenario called longitudinal and lateral 
movements is used in [24] for finding the proper 
parking lot. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Agent based parking assistance system. 
 
2.3 Wireless sensor based systems 
 
A number of low cost sensor nodes make up a 
Wireless Sensor Network (WSN). They arrange 
themselves for making an ad hoc network through 
the wireless communication module present on 
nodes. Different types of sensors, computation units 
and storage devices are present on each node.  For 
collecting, processing and transmitting information, 
the functional parts let the sensors to be installed 
quickly and easily. They have a bright future since 
WSNs are easily installed in the normal environment 
and they provide the data for positioning and 


===== PAGE 5 =====

 
 
A Survey of Intelligent Car Parking System, Faheem et al. / 714‐726
Vol. 11, October 2013 718 
surveillance. There are two disadvantages 
associated with the video sensors. The first one is 
that video sensors are expensive. Secondly, 
sensors generate huge data at times; whose 
transmission via the Wireless Network is hectic. 
 
[25] discusses a WSN-based intelligent car parking 
system. The system consists of low-cost wireless 
sensors which are installed in a car parking facility. 
Each parking space has a sensor node for detecting 
and checking the occupation of the parking facility. 
Sensor node is used for detecting the status of the 
parking field, which is forwarded regularly to the 
database through the installed wireless sensor and 
its gateway. For performing various management 
functions such as, finding unoccupied parking lot, 
auto-toll, management of security and statistic 
report; the data base is accessed by the upper layer 
management system. The prot otype of the system 
was implemented using crossbow mote. Nodes are 
loaded with light, sound and acoustic sensors for 
the WSN-based car park management system. A 
wide-area architecture used for pervasive sensing 
networks is proposed in Irisnet
1 [26]. This will allow 
the users for getting the information of available 
parking vacancies on their ways, through distributed 
accessing methods. For the detection and 
recognition of the automob iles, this system uses 
video cameras, microphones and motion detectors. 
All the data of the sensors is processed in 
networking environment, which is then posted on 
web. This information can then be retrieved by the 
user from internet.  As the data generated by the 
video camera is huge, a great amount of resources 
such as communication bandwidth, processing 
cycles and energy is required for transferring and 
processing the data.  But the mentioned resources 
are limited in a wireless network. 
 
Wireless network based transportation applications 
are discussed in Traffic Plus Technology [27] and 
MIT intelligent transportation system [28,29]. 
Automobile sensors are inst alled on both sides of 
the road and onto the road bed for retrieving the 
required information of the vehicles. These 
systems are not architected for car parking 
management, though they are effective for 
checking traffic and road condition. The used 
                                                     
 
1
http://www.intel.com/technology/techresearch/research/ 
rs11031.htm 
 
hardware in these systems is also expensive and 
complex. For accurate and reliable detection of 
vehicles in parking facility, the use of magnetic and 
ultrasonic sensors is proposed in [30]. The 
modified version of min-max algorithm is used to 
detect the cars through magnetometers while an 
algorithm for ultrasonic sensors is also utilized.  
 
There are other solutions as well that focuses on 
the use of sensor tech nologies (magnetometers 
and video cameras, etc) for parking lot 
applications. However, magnetometers are 
sensitive to environmental issues; which results in 
an inaccurate detections at times. We also have to 
place the magnetometers close to the cars since it 
measures the change in magnitude and direction 
of Earth’s magnetic field resulting from the 
presence of the car. Though it’s possible in the 
proximity of the parking lo t’s entrance; but it’s not 
possible in upper floors as there is no entrance 
marking and the vehicles also move at a higher 
speed.  The solutions based on video cameras are 
very expensive and the huge amount of data 
generated is difficult to be transmitted over multiple 
hops in a wireless network. These discrepancies 
and the movement of other objects in a parking 
space including human beings, reduce the 
applicability of either magnetometers or video 
cameras alone for parking lot management. The 
traffic surveillance syst em of [31] utilizes 
magnetometers for detecting the presence of 
vehicles along with the estimation of the speed of 
vehicles in the proximity of street intersections and 
parking facilities. These magnetic signatures help 
the system classify and re-identify vehicles.  
 
The design and implementation problems of a 
reliable WSN system usin g magnetic sensors are 
proposed in [32].The magnetic sensors in the 
parking lots transfers the parking information to the 
APs on the road sides. The system can find out the 
unoccupied parking places in real time and then 
forwards that information to the user. A detection 
scheme relying on magnet ometer signature 
measurements is proposed in [32] and 
implemented on Mica2 motes. The use of tiered 
architecture for the implementation of the car-park 
management system using the DSYS25z [33] 
magnetic sensor boards developed by Tyndall [30] 
is proposed in [34] as part of D-Systems Project 
[35]. The problems associated with wireless 
communications in parking lot environment are 

===== PAGE 6 =====

 
A Survey of Intelligent Car Parking System, Faheem et al. / 714‐726
Journal of Applied Research and Technology 719
highlighted, and recommendations of dynamic and 
robust routing, delayed retransmissions are 
proposed on the basis of experimental results for 
overcoming the problems. For multi storied parking 
lots where ultrasonic sensors are connected 
through a bus style network for distribution of 
power and transmission of sensing reports, Sipark 
PMA [36] is one of the prominent parking guidance 
systems. The driver, after entering the parking 
facility, is directed to pa rking vacancy through the 
shortest route by the guidance system.  
 
The serious problem of hard installation and power 
wastage in existing roadside parking system of ITS 
is solved by a smart roadside parking management 
system based on sensor network presented in [9]. 
The sensors present at the nodes are small and 
they consume low power. They sense the 
disturbances in Earth’s magnetic field for identifying 
the vehicle. The nodes sleep at regular intervals and 
are woken up by the internal microcontroller for 
gathering parking related information and 
communicating with other sensors. This periodic 
sleeping also helps in saving power. A general case 
of implementation is shown in Figure 2. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. WSN system with magnetic sensor. 
 
2.4 GPS based systems 
 
The information about the location and availability 
of a parking space near the destination is provided 
to the drivers by the current GPS-based vehicle 
navigation system. The information of the current 
state of the parking facilit y is provided. That’s why 
they can’t guarantee a parking lot when the driver 
reaches the facility. A scie ntific solution based on 
utilization of the past and current status of the 
parking lot is proposed in [37]. Poisson process is 
used for modeling the availability of a parking lot. 
An intelligent algorithm which helps the driver in 
choosing the slot with maximum probability of 
being vacant is presented in [37] as well. Cerreo 
[38] had a yearlong study on street parking, which 
focused on different issues concerned with on-
street parking namely policy, planning, 
management and operations. Various methods 
and different cities were used for demonstrating 
these issues. It also highlighted different 
challenges of on-street parking such as peer-to-
peer exchange and storage of parking information.  
 
Arnott and Rowse [39] modeled parking into spatial 
structure, trip generation technology, technology of 
parking and travel, and stat ionary-state conditions. 
The problem with this modeling is that it doesn’t 
take traffic congestion into consideration.  
 
Chon et al. [40] presented a location based system 
called NAPA (Nearest Available Parking lot 
Application) (Figure 3). This system helps in 
locating the parking lots on campus or areas like 
airports, but it doesn’t provide any information 
about the availability of vacancy. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. NAPA architecture. 
 
2.5 Vehicular communication systems 
 
[41] proposes a new smart parking technique based 
on vehicular communication for large parking lots. 
This scheme provides the real-time parking 
navigation service, intell igent antitheft protection, 
and friendly parking information dissemination to the 


===== PAGE 7 =====

 
 
A Survey of Intelligent Car Parking System, Faheem et al. / 714‐726
Vol. 11, October 2013 720 
driver. The scheme is called SPARK and is defined 
by using parking lot RSUs for closely observing and 
managing the whole parking facility using VANET 
communication technology. A general 
implementation can be seen in Figure 4. SPARK 
scheme makes the following contributions. 
 
 It provides real time parking navigation to the 
drivers for finding the vacant parking space, 
saving fuel and time. 
 
 It provides VANET-based intelligent anti-theft 
protection. Due to this, all the parked cars at the 
parking facility are guarded by the parking facility’s 
RSUs. Any car which tries to leave the parking 
facility illegally will be detected by the RSU. 
 
 It arranges friendly parking information distribution 
service to all the mobile cars.  
 
 
 
Figure 4. Vehicular communication-based 
smart parking technique. 
 
2.6 Vision based systems 
 
The parking control and revenue system in big cities 
are relying on devices such as coins or token based 
parking meters, which requires exact change and 
man power for monitoring the parking lots, making it 
unfavorable. So a more efficient design for 
automated parking meter and driver assistance is 
presented in [13]. It is linked to a centralized traffic 
control authority, which collects all the charges, and 
also maintains the implementation of parking rules.  
This system has a number of subsystems namely an 
Ad-hoc subsystem, a parking gateway subsystem, a 
vehicle detection subsystem and a video image 
processor sensor subsystem. There are two classes 
of cars which are considered by this architecture. 
 
 Class 1 vehicles  are those vehicles which do 
not have any embedded wireless system 
 
 Class 2 vehicles are those vehicles which have 
an embedded wireless device with Ad-hoc 
networking capability.  
 
Every car has a unique Vehicle Identification 
Number (VID) associated with it. For overcoming 
the common discrepancies of the existing vision 
based target parking position labeled methods in 
dark indoor parking sites, [42] proposes a light stripe 
projection based free parking space recognition 
method. For recognition of the 3D information of 
parking site, light stripe projection method is used. 
System is able to recognize discontinue points, pivot 
and opposite site reference points, once the 
analysis of 3D information takes place. For 
automatic steering movement during parking 
operation; a kind of driver  assistant system known 
as intelligent parking assist  system is used, which 
has the following six parts [43]:  
 
 Target position designation 
 
 Deciding the path 
 
 Finding the path 
 
 Active steering 
 
 Active braking 
 
 Human Machine Interface (HMI)   
 
The 3D information of the final position of the car is 
recognized by the target position designation. 
Parallel Parking is achieved through the use of 
range sensors like ultrasonic sensors [44-46] and 
SRRs (Short Range Radars) [47,48], for finding the 
free space. Vision based approach is mostly used 
for perpendicular parking. The high price of scan 
type laser makes it less favorable for mass 
production. The low cost ultrasonic and SRR’s 
aren’t efficient for finding the slanted free space. 
Backward monitoring camera has become an 


===== PAGE 8 =====

 
A Survey of Intelligent Car Parking System, Faheem et al. / 714‐726
Journal of Applied Research and Technology 721
essential component of par king assist system for 
the drivers to monitor on-going parking operation 
visually [49]. Different methods are used for finding 
the free space. For finding the 3D information of 
nearby vehicles, Nico Kaempchen has used 
binocular stereo [50]. Vision algorithm for 
designating the vacant lot through parking slot 
markings’ recognition has been developed by Jin Xu 
[51] and Yu Tanaka [52], and [53-55]. For finding 
the 3D information of the nearby vehicle, C. Vestri 
[56] used motion stereo. [57] and [58] have 
combined HMI based manual designation methods 
with vision based system by using such automatic 
recognition algorithms. Un supervised vision based 
system for detecting the availability of a lot is 
proposed in [59]. This approach uses only few 
frames per second. It is also not very complex to 
compute. This method has 3 main processing stages.  
 
 The pre-processing of raw images 
captured by camera takes place.  
 The shadows present in the image are 
properly attenuated or completely removed 
while the distortion is also taken care of.  
 The establishment of correspondence 
between the stationary cameras and visible 
parking places takes place. This process takes 
occlusions into consideration as well.  
 
Then the evaluation of parking place status takes 
place. An intelligent car searching technique for 
large parking facilities is proposed in [60]. 
Cameras are installed on the roads. The 
recognition of vision related information of car like 
color, license plate takes place and are then stored 
in database. Since the license number plate 
recognition system is not reliable, so for sorting the 
retrieved results; an intelligent car searching 
algorithm which relies on the probability of 
classification of color and recognition of license 
plate is used. This method was also applied to a 
large outdoor car parking facility.  
 
In [61] a new system based on image processing 
is proposed for provision of parking information 
and guidance. This system has the ability to count 
the number of parked cars and identify the free lots 
available. The system uses images for detection of 
the vehicles. A camera for capturing the reference 
image is present at the entrance. After the 
reference image is captured, a sequence of 
images is captured as well which is then compared 
with reference image for image matching with the 
help of edge detection performed through Prewitt 
Edge Detection operator. On the basis of the 
percentage of matching, guidance and information 
is provided to the driver.  
 
2.7 Other miscellaneous techniques 
 
A parking reservation service for reserving a 
vacant parking spot via the internet is proposed in 
[62]. This system utilizes the internet for a quick 
and easy search for the vacant lot. By using it 
together with a smart card, the system also 
provides recognition and payments services to the 
driver. In [63], a multilevel driver assistance system 
for assisting in the parking process is proposed. A 
parking assistance syst em along with parking 
administration system, and employed sensor 
systems are mentioned as well. A general 
architecture of a driver assistance system which 
relies on path planning and Human-Machine 
interface (HMI) modules is  presented as well. [63] 
also describes both the design of the system’s HMI 
and the parking possibility region-based path 
planning method proposed for implementation of 
the presented architecture. A four-wheeled vehicle 
or welfare vehicle is proposed in [64]. It is a self-
propelled, four wheeled electric chair which steers 
through the steering wheel control. [65] considers 
a parking method for an independent car in an 
underground parking facility. This implemented 
method is decomposed into:  
 
 Motion control of the vehicle from the resident 
to the parking facility on the basis of 
configuration given by the vehicle owner.  
 
  After the car joins the underground parking 
facility, the searching and examining of a free 
space in the car park which is followed by 
operations used for parking movement takes 
place. 
 
 The positioning mechanism which allows the 
car for keeping the perfect position in the global 
frame during the whole displacement.  
 
In [66], assistance of a vehicle with mobile guidance 
system, by measuring the position and heading of a 
guided vehicle to instruct the steering and velocity of 
its target, is presented. An intelligent organizer of 
objects using Genetic Algorithms (GA) and Hill 

===== PAGE 9 =====

 
 
A Survey of Intelligent Car Parking System, Faheem et al. / 714‐726
Vol. 11, October 2013 722 
Climbing (HC) for solving the space allocation 
problem in warehouse, parking facility and the 
cultivation land is presented in [67]. [67] also 
implements an organizing technique; which randomly 
organizes the space, for comparing the results with 
the intelligent techniques.   
 
The problems of independent parking and obstacle 
avoidance have been address by the increasing 
number of carlike mobile robot (CLMR) studies. 
Convenience can be provided to a novice driver by 
an autonomous parking controller. However, an 
inadequately designed controller puts the drive and 
car in jeopardy. [68] presents a novel multifunctional 
intelligent autonomous parking controller. It is able 
to effectively park the CLMR in an appropriate place 
by using the data of integrated sensor, which has 
the ability to get the surrounding data of the robot.  
 
An ultrasonic sensor array system which has group-
sensor firing intervals is developed as well. A 
complete contactless sensory coverage of the 
whole workspace can be provided by using a 
binaural approach to the CLMR. The posture of the 
mobile robot in the parking facility can be obtained 
through proposed heuristic controller.  
 
A wireless based parking service is presented in [6]. 
It will not only provide intelligent parking services, 
but it will also eliminate misparking. To provide an 
intelligent and automatic parking service, the 
presented system will use sensor technologies 
along with wireless network. The analysis of the 
occurrence of misparking in a traditional parking 
facility is given through the probability model. 
 
3. Economic Analysis of Intelligent Car Parking 
Systems 
 
Economic analysis is the core study for assessing 
and exploring the project's feasibility. It plays an 
important role in deciding whether to start the project 
or not. Economic Analysis can be used to minimize 
risks and improve investment efficiency. The role of 
economic analysis is minimizing the risks and 
improving the investment efficiency. As intelligent 
parking service is a part of ITS, it can decrease the 
impact of uneven distribution of parking in different 
parking facilities.  [7] uses the concepts of traffic 
impact analysis TIA for utilizing the engineering 
economy to analyze the advantages of regional 
parking guidance system. According to [67], the 
economic analysis aims at:  
 
 Reduction of negative impacts of parking services. 
 
 Reduction of investment. 
 
 Increasing the social, economic and 
environmental benefits of the parking facility. 
 
One of the widely used economic analysis technique 
is Cost-Benefit analysis, which relies on discounted 
value benefits and cost for determination and 
evaluation of the resource allocation for both public 
and non-profit sector projects. However, for parking 
guidance system; we cannot use traditional Cost-
Benefit analysis, as it’s hard to define and measure 
the costs and benefits. Also, there are certain 
assumptions required for cost-benefit analysis which 
may not exit for PGS. Therefore, for more accurate 
result; the legitimacy of the estimates must be on the 
basis of large number of basic data and information.  
 
Table 1 gives a summary of the various approaches 
that have been discussed and highlights their key 
features. 
 
4. Conclusion 
 
In this paper, various systems that provide 
intelligent parking services are discussed. These 
systems can counter the parking problems that arise 
due to the unavailability of a reliable, efficient and 
modern Parking system.  The use of different 
modern techniques such as Expert Systems, 
wireless sensor based, fuzzy based, GPS based, 
Vehicular communication based and Vision based 
can reduce the parking related issues. Such system 
can help the economic, social and safety based 
aspects of the society. It also helps in preserving the 
environment, fuel and time. The economic analysis 
can help us find the feasible project so that we can 
have a better parking system without making the 
economy suffer. Future work should be done for 
integrating different technologies together in order to 
achieve a system which is the most efficient, 
reliable, secure and inexpensive. The economic 
analysis should be done both quantitatively and 
qualitatively. After the ec onomic analysis is done, 
then the project can be finalized. 
 
 

===== PAGE 10 =====

 
A Survey of Intelligent Car Parking System, Faheem et al. / 714‐726
Journal of Applied Research and Technology 723
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References 
 
[1] L. Wenghong, X.Fanghua, L. Fasheng, “Design of 
Inner Intelligent Car Parking System”, International 
Conference on Information Management, Innovation 
Management and Industrial Engineering 2008. 
 
[2] C. Wenzhi, L. Bai, "A Smart Roadside Parking 
Navigation System Based On Sensor Networks For ITS”, 
IET International Conference on Wireless, Mobile and 
Multimedia Networks, 2006, pp.1-4, 6-9 Nov. 2006. 
 
[3] C.C. Li, S.Y. Chou, S. W. Lin, "An agent-based 
platform for drivers and car parks negotiation", 2004 
IEEE International Conferenc e on Networking, Sensing 
and Control, pp. 1038- 1043, 2004. 
 
[4] R.J. Oyentaryo, M. Pas quier, "Self-trained automated 
parking system", Control, Automation, Robotics and 
Vision Conference, 8th ICARCV, pp. 1005- 1010, 6-9 
Dec. 2004. 
 
[5] S. Shankar, S.M. Mehmood, "An intelligent 
architecture for metropolitan area parking control and toll 
collection", IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium, 2005., 
pp. 723- 728, 6-8 June 2005. 
 
[6] Y.Gongjan, M.C. Weigle, S.  Olariu, "A Novel Parking 
Service Using Wireless Networks", IEEE/INFORMS 
International Conference on Service Operations, Logistics 
and Informatics, 2009,  pp.406-411, 22-24 July 2009. 
 
[7] X. Zhang, D. Wan, "Economic Analysis Of Regional 
Parking Guidance System Based On TIA", 2010 WASE 
International Conference on Information Engineering 
(ICIE),, pp.401-404, 14-15 Aug. 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[8] S.Y. Chou, S.W. Lin, C.C. Li, “Dynamic Parking 
Negotiation And Guidance Using An Agent-Based 
Platform”, Expert Systems With Applications, vol. 35, no. 
3, pp. 805-817, 2008. 
 
[9] W. Longfei, C. Hong, L. Yang, "Integrating Mobile 
Agent with Multi-Agent System for Intelligent Parking 
Negotiation and Guidance”,  4th IEEE Conference on 
Industrial Electronics and Applications, pp.1704-1707, 
25-27 May 2009. 
 
[10] R.J.F. Rossetti, R.H. Bo rdinia, A.L.C Bazanna, S. 
Bampi, R. Liu, D.V. Vliet, ”Using DBI Agents To Improve 
Modeling In A Computer Scenario”, Transportation 
Research Part C, 10C(5, 6), pp 373–398, 2002 . 
 
[11] B. Chen, H.C.  Harry, J. Palen, “Integrating Mobile 
Agent Technology With Multi-Agent Systems For 
Distributed Traffic Detection And management 
Systems”, Transportation Research Part C. 
 
[12] H. Dia, “An Agent-Based Approach To Modelling 
Driver Route Choice Behaviour Under The Influence Of 
Real-Time Information”, Transportation Research Part C: 
Emerging Technologies , vol.10, pp 331–349, 2002. 
 
[13] C. C. Min, D. Srinivas an, R.L. Cheu”, Cooperative, 
Hybrid Agent Architecture For Real-Time Traffic Signal 
Control”, IEEE Transaction s on Systems, Man and 
Cybernetics, Part A: Systems and Humans, , vol.33, 
no.5, pp. 597- 607, Sept. 2003. 
 
[14] J.L. Addler, G. Sathapathy, V. Manikonda, B. Bowles, 
V.J. Blue, “A Multi-Agent Approach To Cooperative Traffic 
Management And Route Guidance”, Transportation 
Research Part B 39 (4), pp 297–318, 2005. 
S. No. Different Technologies Features Services Provided
1. Agent Based Dynamic Distribution and Complex 
Traffic Environments 
Bargaining, parking guidance and route 
negotiation etc. 
2. Fuzzy Based Human-like intelligence and expertise Intelligent parking methods e.g. parallel 
parking and perpendicular parking etc. 
3. Wireless Sensor Based Low cost implementation with lower 
power consumption 
Detection and monitoring of the parking 
facility etc. 
4. GPS Based Real time location based information 
and guidance towards destination 
Provides information about the locality 
and availability of parking facility 
5. Vehicular Communication Provision of parking information 
distribution service for mobile vehicles 
Antitheft protection, real time parking 
navigation service etc. 
6. Vision Based Good for car searching in large 
parking lots 
Lot occupancy detection, parking space 
recognition, parking charges collection 
etc. 
 
Table 1. Summary of relevant techniques for intelligent parking systems. 
 

===== PAGE 11 =====

 
 
A Survey of Intelligent Car Parking System, Faheem et al. / 714‐726
Vol. 11, October 2013 724 
[15] F. Balboa, S. Pinsona, “Dynamic Modeling Of A 
Disturbance In A Multi-Agent System For Traffic 
Regulation” Decision Support Systems, vol.41, no.1, pp 
131 – 146, 2005. 
 
[16] Y. Li, R. Ma, L. Wang, “Intelligent Parking 
Negotiation Based On Agent Technology”, WASE 
International Conference on Information Engineering, 
pp.265-268, 10-11 July 2009. 
 
[17] A. Khoukhi, “An Intelligent Multi-Agent System For 
Mobile Robots Navigation And Parking”, IEEE 
International Workshop on Robotic and Sensors 
Environments (ROSE), pp.1-6, 15-16 Oct. 2010. 
 
[18] H. Zhang, M. Zhou, “' Self-Organized Architecture 
For Outdoor Mobile Robot Navigation'', Journal Of 
Zhejiang University Science A. Springer, vol. 6, no.6, pp. 
583-590, June 2005. 
 
[19] R. Abielmona, E.M.  Petriu, T.E. Whalen, 
“Distributed Intelligent Se nsor Agent System For 
Environment Mapping”, Journal Of Ambient Intelligence 
And Humanized Computing.  Springer, vol.1, no.2, 
pp.95-110, 2010. 
 
[20] J. Takahashi, K. Sekiyama, T. Fukuda”, Cooperative 
Object Tracking With Mobile Robotic Sensor Network.” 
Distributed Autonomous Robotic Systems. Springer, 
Berlin, pp 51–62, 2009.  
 
[21] K. Kinoshita, S. Ya sunobu, “Intelligent Parking 
Support System For Four-Wheeled Vehicles In 
Consideration Of Human's Operation Error”, 2004 IEEE 
International Conferenc e on Systems, Man and 
Cybernetics, pp. 3938- 3943, 10-13 Oct. 2004. 
 
[22] S. Insop, K. Gowan, J. Nery, H. Han, T.  Sheng, H. Li, 
F. Karray, “Intelligent Parking System Design Using 
FPGA”, International Conference on Field Programmable 
Logic and Applications, pp.1-6, 28-30 Aug. 2006. 
 
[23] M. Sharafi, A.  Zare, S. Nikpoor, "Intelligent Parking 
Method For Truck In Presence Of Fixed And Moving 
Obstacles And Trailer In Presence Of Fixed Obstacles: 
Advanced Fuzzy Logic Technologies In Industrial 
Applications”, 2010 International Conference On 
Electronics And Information Engineering (ICEIE), 
pp.268-272, 1-3 Aug. 2010. 
 
[24] S. Mohammadi, M. Tavassoli, A. Rajabi, 
"Authoritative Intelligent Perfect Parallel Parking Based 
On Fuzzy Logic Controller For Car-Type Mobile Robot”, 
2011 Eighth International Conference on Information 
Technology: New Generations (ITNG), pp.135-138, 11-
13 April 2011. 
 
[25] V.W.S. Tang, Y. Zheng, J. Cao, “An Intelligent Car 
Park Management System Based On Wireless Sensor 
Networks”, 2006 1st International Symposium On 
Pervasive Computing And Applications, pp.65-70, 3-5 
Aug, 2006.  
 
[26] Moog Crossbow, http://www.xbow.com/. 
 
[27] Corporative Traffic Logi stics, http://www.corporate-
traffic.com/. 
 
[28] MIT, http://web.mit.edu/newsoffice/topic/micros 
ystems-technology-laboratories.html 
 
[29] MIT Media Lab: http://www.media.mit.edu/. 
 
[30] S. Lee, D. Yoon, A. G hosh, “Intelligent Parking Lot 
Application Using Wireless Sensor Networks”, 2008. 
CTS 2008. International Symposium on Collaborative 
Technologies and Systems, pp.48-57, 19-23 May 2008. 
 
[31] S.Y. Cheung, S.C. Erg en,  P. Varaiya, “Traffic 
Surveillance With Wireless Magnetic Sensors”, 
Proceedings of the 12th World Congress On Intelligent 
Transport Systems, San Francisco, CA, Nov 2005.  
 
[32] V.K. Boda,  A. Na sipuri,  I. Howitt, “Design 
Considerations for a Wireless Sensor Network for 
Locating Parking S paces”, IEEE Sout heastCon, pp.698-
703, 22-25 March 200.7 
 
[33] B. O’Flynn, S. Bellis, K. Mahmood, M. Morris, G. 
Duffy, K. Delaney, C. O’Mathuna, “A 3-D Miniaturised 
Programmable Transceiver”, Microelectronics 
International, Emerald Group, vol. 22, no2, pp 8–12, 2005. 
 
[34] J.P. Benson, T. O’Donovan, P. O’Sullivan, U. Roedig, 
C. Sreenan, J. Barton, A. Mu rphy, B. O’Flynn, “Car-Park 
Management Usingwireless Sensor Networks”, 
Proceedings Of The 31st IEEE Conference On Local 
Computer Networks , Tampa, FL, pp 588–595, Nov 2006. 
 
[35] J. Barton,  J. Buckley, B. O’Flynn, S.C. O’Mathuna, 
J.P. Benson, T. O’Donovan, U. Roedig, C. Sreenan, 
“The D-Systems Project - Wireless Sensor Networks For 
Car- Park Management”, Proceedings Of The 65th IEEE 
Vehicular Technology Conference, Dublin, Ireland, 
pp170-173, Apr 2007.  
 
[36] Siemens, http://www.mobility.siemens.com/mobility/ 
global/en/urban-mobility/road-solutions/Pages/road-solu 
tions.aspx  
 
[37] S. Pullola, P.K.  Atrey,  A. El Saddik, “Towards An 
Intelligent GPS-Based Vehicle Navigation System For 
Finding Street Parking Lo ts”, IEEE International 
Conference on Signal Processing And Communications, 
pp1251-1254, 24-27 Nov, 2007. 
 

===== PAGE 12 =====

 
A Survey of Intelligent Car Parking System, Faheem et al. / 714‐726
Journal of Applied Research and Technology 725
[38] A. L. C. De Cerreo, "The Dynamics Of On-Street 
Parking In Large Central Cities”, Transportation 
Research Record, New York University Robert F. 
Wagner Graduate School of Public Service, 2002. 
 
[39] R. Arnott And J. Rowse, "Modeling Parking”, Journal 
Of Urban Economics, vol. 45, no.1, pp 97-124, 1999. 
 
[40] H. D. Chon, D. Agrawa l, And A. E. Abbadi, "NAPA: 
Nearest Available Parking Lot Application”, 18th 
International Conference on  Data Engineering, pp.496-
497, 2002. 
 
[41] L. Rongxing, L. Xiaodong, Z. Haojin, S.  Xuemin, 
"An Intelligent Secure And Privacy-Preserving Parking 
Scheme Through Vehicular Communications”, IEEE 
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol.59, no.6, pp 
2772-2785, July 2010. 
 
[42] G.J. Ho, S.K Dong, J.Y. Pa l, K Jaihie, "Light Stripe 
Projection Based Parking Space Detection For Intelligent 
Parking Assist System”, IEEE Intelligent Vehicles 
Symposium, pp.962-968, 13-15 June 2007. 
 
[43] H. G. Jung, C. G. Choi, D.  S. Kim, And P. J. Yoon, 
“System Configuration Of Intelligent Parking Assistant 
System”, In Proc. 13th World Congr. Intell. Transp. Syst. 
Services, London, U.K., Oct. 8–12, pp 1–8, 2006.  
 
[44] R. Frank, “Sensing In The Ultimately Safe Vehicle”, 
Presented at the Society Automotive Engineers, Detroit, 
MI, 2004, SAE Paper 2004-21-0055. 
 
[45] CNN, Toyota Unveils Car That Parks Itself, Sep. 1, 
2003.[Online].Available:http://edition.cnn.com/2003/TEC
H/ptech/09/01/toyota.prius.reut/index.html 
 
[46] T. Tellem, Top Ten High Tech Car Technologies, 
July, 23 2007. [Online]. Available: http://www.edmunds. 
com/car-reviews/top-10/top-10-high-tech-car-safety-
technologies.html 
 
[47] S. Hiramatsu, A. Hibi, Y. Tanaka, T. Kakinami, Y. 
Iwata, And M. Nakamura, “Rearview Camera Based 
Parking Assist System With Voice Guidance”, Presented 
At The Society Automotive Engineers World Congr. 
Exhibition, Detroit, MI, 2002, SAE Paper 2002-01-0759. 
 
[48] M. Furutani, “Obstacle Detection Systems For 
Vehicle Safety”, Presented at  the society of automotive 
engineering world congr., Detroit, MI, Mar. 8–11, 2004, 
SAE Paper 2004-21-0057. 
 
[49] J. Xu, G. Chen, And M. Xie, “Vision-Guided 
Automatic Parking For Smart Car”, Proceedings of the 
IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium, pp.725-730, 2000. 
 
[50] Y. Tanaka, M. Saiki,  M. Katoh, And T. Endo, 
“Development of Image Recognition for a Parking Assist 
System”, In Proc. 13th World Congr. Intell. Transp. Syst. 
Services, pp. 1–7, Oct. 8–12, 2006, 
 
[51] H. G. Jung, D. S. Kim,  P. J. Yoon, And J. Kim, 
“Parking Slot Markings Recognition for Automatic 
Parking Assist System”, In Proc. IEEE Intell. Veh. 
Symp., pp. 106–113, Jun. 13–15, 2006. 
 
[52] H. G. Jung, D. S. Kim,  P. J. Yoon, And J. Kim, 
“Structure Analysis Based Parking Slot Marking 
Recognition for Semi-Automatic Parking System”, In 
Structural, Syntactic, And Statistical Pattern 
Recognition. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag, pp. 
384–393, Aug. 2006. 
 
[53] H. G. Jung, D. S. Kim,  P. J. Yoon, And J. Kim, 
“Uniform User Interface for Semi-Automatic Parking Slot 
Markings Recognition”, IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., 
vol.59, no.2, pp 616–626, Feb. 2010. 
 
[54] M. Wada, X. Mao, H. Hashimoto, M. Mizutani, M. 
Saito, “Ican: Pursuing Technology for Near-Future 
ITS”, IEEE Intell. Syst., vol.19, no.1, pp. 18–23, 
Jan./Feb. 2004. 
 
[55] M. Wada, K. S. Yoon, And H. Hashimoto, 
“Development of Advanced Parking Assistance 
System”, IEEE Trans. Ind. El ectron., vol.50, no.1, pp.  
4–17, Feb. 2003. 
 
[56] T. Moran, “Self-Parking Technology Hits the 
Market”, Autom. News, vol.8, no.6227, P. 22, Oct. 2006. 
 
[57] T. Moran, J. Meiners, “The Arrival of Problem-
Free Parking”, Autom. News Eur., vol.11, no.24, pp. 
8, Nov. 2006. 
 
[58] V. Agarwal, N. V. Mura li, And C. Chandramouli, “A 
Cost-Effective Ultrasonic Sensor-Based Driver-
Assistance System for Congested Traffic Conditions”, 
IEEE Transactions on Inte lligent Trans portation 
Systems,  vol.10, no.3, pp.486-498, Sept. 2009. 
 
[59] T. Fabian, "An Algorithm for Parking Lot Occupation 
Detection”, Computer Information Systems And Industrial 
Management Applications, pp. 165-170, 26-28 June 2008. 
 
[60] T.H. Chun, Z. Ji e,  Y.X. Chen, L.H. Ze,  Z. Pei, Z.Q. 
Hua, "Intelligent Car-Searching System for Large Park”, 
International Conference on Machine Learning And 
Cybernetics, pp. 3134-3138, 12-15 July 2009.  
 
[61] S. Banerjee, P. Choudek ar, M.K.  Muju, "Real Time 
Car Parking System Using Image Processing”, 2011 3rd 
International Conference on  Electronics Computer 
Technology (ICECT), pp.99-103, 8-10 April 2011. 
 

===== PAGE 13 =====

 
 
A Survey of Intelligent Car Parking System, Faheem et al. / 714‐726
Vol. 11, October 2013 726 
[62] K. Inaba, M. Shibui, T.  Naganawa, M. Ogiwara, N. 
Yoshikai, "Intelligent Parking Reservation Service on the 
Internet”, Symposium on Applications and the Internet 
Workshops, pp.159-164, 2001. 
 
[63] M. Wada, K. Yoon, H.  Hashimoto, S. Matsuda, 
"Development of Advanced Parking Assistance System 
using Human Guidance”, IEEE/ASME International 
Conference on Advanced Intelligent Mechatronics, pp. 
997-1002, 1999. 
 
[64] S. Yasunobu, K. Ki noshita, "Development of 
Intelligent Parking Support System for Welfare Vehicle”, 
IEEE International Symp osium on Computational 
Intelligence In Robotics And Automation, pp.  682- 687, 
16-20 July 2003.  
 
[65] E. Seignez, A. Lam bert, T. Maurin, “Autonomous 
Parking Carrier for Intelligent Vehicle”,  IEEE Intelligent 
Vehicles Symposium, pp. 411- 416, 6-8 June 2005. 
 
[66] N. Hashimoto, S. Ka to, N. Minobe, S. Tsugawa, 
"Automated Vehicle Mobile Guidance System for 
Parking Assistance”, IEEE Intelligent Vehicles 
Symposium, pp. 630-635, 13-15 June 2007. 
 
[67] E.R.Q. Garcia, G.C.M Qu intero, “Space Allocation 
using Intelligent Optimizati on Technique”, 2010 IEEE 
ANDESCON, pp. 1-6, 15-17 Sept. 2010. 
 
[68] T.H.S Li, Y.Y. Chieh, W.J. Da, H.M. Ying, C.C.  
Yang, "Multifunctional Intelligent Autonomous Parking 
Controllers for Carlike Mobile Robots”, IEEE 
Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol.57, no.5, pp. 
1687-1700, May 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 