

===== PAGE 1 =====

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT ATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, MAY 2018 1365
Roadside Magnetic Sensor System for Vehicle
Detection in Urban Environments
Qing Wang, Jianying Zheng, Hao Xu, Bin Xu, and Rong Chen
Abstract— Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) are widely
researched to improve the trafﬁ c situation. In ITS, vehicle
detection system plays a signiﬁcant role. At present, vehicle
detection is often conducted by inductive loops, which are very
expensive and inconvenient to install and maintain. Video camera
is another frequently used detector, but it needs high computing
power. In order to solve these problems, this paper focuses
on the development of a roadside magnetic sensor system for
vehicle detection. The device is installed at the side of the
road and measures trafﬁc in the adjacent lane (the closest lane
to the sensor node). The data are transmitted by the IEEE
802.15.4 communication protocol. A novel adapted threshold state
machine algorithm is proposed to detect vehicles. Since false
judgments created by large vehicles passing in the nonadjacent
lane (the lane next to the closest lane to the sensor node) are
frequent in urban environments, a novel feature extracted by
fusion of three magnetic sensor signals are proposed to reduce
this error. The developed magnetic sensor system is wireless,
compact, and cost-effective. The experimental results show that
the proposed system achieves high accuracy and is viable in urban
environments.
Index Terms — Intelligent transportation systems, magnetic
sensors, vehicle detection, wireless sensor network.
I. I NTRODUCTION
I
N urban cities, the trafﬁc situation has become very dete-
riorating and the trafﬁc congestion is very common, which
produces huge economic losses. Intelligent Transportation
Systems (ITS) are worldwide re searched to alleviate these
problems and improve the trafﬁc efﬁciency [1]. As a part of
ITS, real-time vehicle detection plays an important role, since
it can gather the fundamental data used in ITS [2]. At present,
there are various systems used f or vehicle detection, such as
inductive loop system, video camera system, microwave radar
system, pneumatic tube system and piezoelectric cable system.
In these systems, the detectors are ﬁrst buried under the road
surface or equipped above the road. After that, they collect
and send data to the trafﬁc management center through wires.
Manuscript received June 13, 2016; revised January 19, 2017 and
May 8, 2017; accepted June 27, 2017. Date of publication August 7, 2017; date
of current version May 2, 2018. This work was supported by the 2015 annual
general college graduate research and i nnovation project in Jiangsu province
under Grant KYLX15_1236. The Associate Editor for this paper was
W.-H. Lin. (Corresponding author: Jianying Zheng.)
Q. Wang, J. Zheng, B. Xu, and R. Chen are with the School
of Urban Rail Transportation, Soochow University, Suzhou 215137,
China (e-mail: wangqing9115@163.com; zhengjianying@suda.edu.cn;
xubin0924@foxmail.com; chenrong1006@163.com).
H. Xu is with the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering,
University of Nevada, Reno, NV 89557 USA (e-mail: haox@unr.edu).
Experimental data are available at http://lifepaper.cn/ExperimentalData.zip.
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this paper are available
online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TITS.2017.2723908
The shortcomings of these systems are high cost, complicated
installation and limited scalability [3]. Since wireless sensor
network (WSN) has many advantages, such as low cost,
low power consumption, low complexity and self-organizing,
the vehicle detection systems based on WSN are proposed to
solve these problems [4], [5].
The detection sensor is the key part of a vehicle detection
system. The most common detection sensor used in trafﬁc
surveillance system is the inductive loop sensor which has the
following drawbacks. During the time of installation or main-
tenance, the inductive loop must be directly buried under the
lane, so that the trafﬁc will be interrupted. The cutting seam
will soften the pavement and it is easy to damage the road
surface. The inductive loop is also easily affected by freezing,
saline and busy trafﬁc [2], [6]. Another widely used detection
sensor is the video camera. It is a non-intrusive sensor that
can be installed above the road so as to avoid damaging
the road. Video camera system collects highly accurate trafﬁc
information, but requires high computing power, wired power
supplies and wired communication. This increases the cost
and decreases scalability. The video camera is also easily
affected by environmental factors, such as rain, wind, snow
and fog [7], [8].
Recently, the magnetic sensor has been used in vehicle
detection due to its advantages, such as low cost, small
size, high accuracy, and easy ins tallation. The applications of
magnetic sensor are often based on WSN. It is a very attractive
alternate to the conventional vehicle detection sensors, such as
inductive loops and video cameras. Unlike these conventional
methods, using magnetic sensor for vehicle detection based on
WSN has the following advantages.
1) There is no need to close the lane and cause damage
to the road surface. The repair is as convenient as
installation.
2) Magnetic sensor detects the vehicles through the changes
on earth’s magnetic ﬁeld, so it can’t be easily inﬂuenced
by the climate.
3) There is no reaction to the non-ferromagnetic objects.
Therefore, the magnetic sensor can effectively reduce
the detection error.
4) The type of vehicle can be roughly determined by the
ﬂuctuation range on the magnetic ﬁeld [9].
Among the researched magnetic sensor systems, there are
two main conﬁgurations of the sensor nodes. In one conﬁg-
uration, the sensor nodes are buried under the road surface.
Whereas, in the other conﬁguration, the sensor nodes are
placed at the side of the road. Both of these two conﬁgurations
1524-9050 © 2017 I EEE. Personal u se is perm itted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:27:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 2 =====

1366 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, MAY 2018
have their own advantages and d isadvantages. For example,
sensors buried under the road surface have stronger signal
strength while those placed at the side of the road have
easier installation and maintenance. University of California at
Berkeley is the forerunner of using magnetic sensor for vehicle
detection. Their sensor nodes are designed to deploy in the
center of the lane and the installation takes about 10 minutes.
During the period of installation and repair, the trafﬁc has
to be interrupted [2]. Therefore, the system has the same
disadvantage as inductive loop systems. In order to reduce
the system cost and the difﬁcu lty of installation, most recent
researches prefer a more convenient conﬁguration method that
deploying the sensor nodes at roadside.
In this paper, “feature” means character calculated by raw
data and it can be used in vehicle detection algorithms.
“Feature” is extracted from raw data and is used in detection
algorithms instead of the raw data. Vehicle detection algorithm
based on the extracted feature is of great importance in vehicle
detection systems. Most researches use threshold methods to
detect vehicles. Because the magnetic ﬁeld signal is almost
stable at a value when there are no vehicles around, and the
signal changes a lot when a vehicle passes by. Finally, this
signal goes back to the previous stable value when the vehicle
leaves. This background magnetic signal value is deﬁned as
magnetic baseline. In [10], a ﬁxed threshold state machine
algorithm based on a single axis magnetic signal are proposed.
In this algorithm, a ﬁxed threshold around the magnetic signal
baseline is set ﬁrst. When a vehicle is passing over the detec-
tion area, the magnetic signal ﬂuctuates around the baseline
and crosses the threshold. If the duration of this state surpasses
a critical value, then the vehicle decision can be generated.
Since temperature drift and time drift of the magnetic ﬁeld
can slightly change the magnetic baseline from time to time,
the ﬁxed threshold method cannot work efﬁciently when the
drifts occur. In order to solve this problem, in [3] and [11],
an adaptive threshold state machine algorithm is used to track
the magnetic baseline. In this method, the magnetic baseline
keeps updating along with the drifts. To improve the signal-
to-noise ratio (SNR), in [12], a feature calculated by cross
correlation between the raw signal and a referential signal
is obtained ﬁrst. Then, a simple threshold method is used
to detect vesicles. By this way, there is no need to track
the magnetic baseline. Another algorithm that can ignore the
inﬂuence of drifts is used in [13] . In this research, the variance
weighting is extracted by 3-axis magnetic signals to reﬂect
the magnetic ﬁeld ﬂuctuations caused by vehicles. Then a
ﬁxed double-threshold state machine algorithm is proposed.
When the variance weighting runs over the two thresholds
excessively, a vehicle detection decision generates. Similarly,
when the variance weighting goes below the two thresholds
excessively, a vehicle is considered to leave the detection area.
By setting two thresholds, the entry or departure of a vehicle
can be guaranteed.
Usually, one magnetic sensor node is set to measure one-
lane trafﬁc because of its low sensing distance. However, large
vehicles driving in the nonadjacent lane may cause false calls
for their strong signal strength. This case is easier to take place
in urban cities in which the lane-width is relatively smaller.
Until now, little attention has been paid to this circumstance.
Unlike the most researched magnetic sensor systems, this
paper describes a more convenient system that place the sensor
node at the side of the road. The magnetic ﬁeld angle between
y-axis and z-axis is calculated as the vehicle feature and
an adaptive threshold state machine algorithm are proposed
to realize the vehicle detection. In order to reduce the false
detections caused by vehicles d riving in the nonadjacent lane,
a novel feature extracted by fusion of magnetic sensor array
is used to make the system practicable.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II,
system hardware and sensor node conﬁguration are introduced.
In Section III, the vehicle feature calculated by the magnetic
signals is ﬁrst analyzed, and then vehicle detection algorithm is
presented. In Section IV , the way to reduce misjudgments in
the nonadjacent lane is introduced. In Section V , the exper-
imental results and related anal ysis are performed. Finally,
Section VI draws conclusions and discusses the future works.
II. H
ARDWARE PLATFORM AND SYSTEM CONFIGURATION
Mother-earth provides us with earth’s magnetic ﬁeld that
permeates everything between the south and north magnetic
poles. As we know, almost all tra fﬁc vehicles have signiﬁcant
amount of ferrous metals in their chassis (iron, steel, nickel,
cobalt, etc.). Once a vehicle passing nearby, it will cause
disturbances to the magnetic ﬁeld and a magnetic sensor can
be used to capture these disturbances. Appeal to this fact, mag-
netic sensor is a good candidate for detecting vehicles [14].
The triaxial magnetic sensor Honeywell HMC5883L is
chosen in this research for its high sensitivity and low cost.
HMC5883L is a fully digital sensor with a 12-bit built-in
analog-to-digital converter (ADC). This sensor can achieve
5 milligauss resolution in ±8 gauss ﬁeld and each sensor
module costs only about 2 dollars [15]. ZigBee is a wireless
communication protocol based on IEEE 802.15.4 standard.
Since it uses low overhead data transmission and requires
low system resources which are vitally important factors
for embedded sensor networks. ZigBee is a more suitable
communication technology for the wireless sensor networks
based ITS applications when compared with other short-range
wireless protocols such as Bluetooth and Wi-Fi [16]. Therefore
in this paper, the CC2530 wireless transceiver is used for
wireless communication. CC2530 is a chip designed by Texas
Instruments Inc. (TI) which supports ZigBee protocol. This
transceiver works on the 2.4 GHz channel. It has an outdoor
communication range of 100 m, required power of 150 mW
and its data transmission rate is 250 kb/s [17].
A single printed circuit board (PCB) we designed is shown
in Fig. 1. It contains an STM32F103RBT6 microprocessor,
three HMC5883L magnetic sensors and a CC2530 wireless
transceiver. The magnetic sensors are set at different height and
the distance between every two adjacent sensors is 5 cm. When
the circuit is running, the microprocessor samples the magnetic
sensor output at a rate of 50 Hz. The data is transferred from
one PCB to another wirelessly or from a PCB to a laptop
through a serial port. Many rest components of this PCB are
designed to complete other tasks that have nothing to do with
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:27:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 3 =====

W ANGet al.: ROADSIDE MAGNETIC SENSOR SYSTEM FOR VEHICLE DETECTION IN URBAN ENVIRONMENTS 1367
Fig. 1. Developed PCB for sensor node.
Fig. 2. Sensor node conﬁguration diagram.
this research. In other words, the PCB can be redesigned to
have a more compact size if it only operates vehicle detection
task.
The PCB works as a sensor node or a sink node of the
entire vehicle detection system. The speciﬁc way of system
conﬁguration is shown in Fig. 2. The sensor node is deployed
at the side of the road and the lowest one among the three
magnetic sensors is set at a height of 20 cm. The x-axis is
along or contrary to the direction of the lane. The y-axis is per-
pendicular to the direction of the lane, and the z-axis is
perpendicular to the road surface and upward. Because the
direction of the lane differs in different roads, vehicles may
drive in the forward direction or in the reverse direction of
x-axis. According to the experiments in [14] and [18], these
two circumstances only cause the symmetry of the curve of
x, y,a n d z axes. As a result, the direction of the lane has
no inﬂuence on the vehicle detection methods used in this
research. In our ﬁeld experiment, the direction of the lane
is contrary to the direction of x-axis. This is also shown
in Fig. 2. The arrow indicates the direction of the driving
Fig. 3. Magnetic ﬁeld readings for a sedan.
vehicles. When conducting vehicle detection tasks, the sensor
node will measure the magnetic ﬁeld and transmit data to the
sink node by ZigBee communication. Then, the sink node will
receive the data and transmit it to the laptop by serial port
communication. Finally, the laptop will display and save the
trafﬁc measurements. Although the magnetic sensor has three
axes, in this paper, only y-axis and z-axis outputs are used in
feature extraction and vehi cle detection algorithms.
III. V
EHICLE DETECTION
A. Signal Filtering and Feature Extraction
As a vector, the magnetic ﬁeld can be divided into three
components in x, y,a n d z directions. When a vehicle passes
by a magnetic sensor, the change of magnetic ﬁeld caused
by the vehicle can be reﬂected in the output of each sensor
axis. Fig. 3 depicts the raw outputs of x, y,a n d z axis of the
sensor at a height of 20 cm when a sedan passing over in
the adjacent lane. Since the fre quent up-and-down ﬂuctuation
of the magnetic signal is not a desirable characteristic for the
vehicle detection algorithm, a smoothing ﬁlter, which takes
a running average of the signal, is used to smooth out the
signal [19]. The running average is given by the following
equation:
B
i (k) =
⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩
ri (k) + ri (k − 1) +··· ri (1)
k , k < M
ri (k) + ri (k − 1) +··· ri (k − M + 1)
M , k ≥ M
fo r i ∈{ x, y, z} (1)
where r (k) is the raw signal, M is the predeﬁned running
average buffer size, and the subscript i represents one of the
three axes. The ﬁltered signal of the above sedan is shown
in Fig. 4. After ﬁltering, the amplitudes of each signal get a
little lower. However, the signals become very smooth and it
facilitates the analysis for vehicle signals.
Usually, single axis signal is used as the vehicle detection
feature, and z-axis is commonly used because its signal is the
most uniform among the three axes. For the magnetic ﬁeld is a
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:27:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 4 =====

1368 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, MAY 2018
Fig. 4. The ﬁltered signal of the sedan.
vector, both strength and direction of the magnetic ﬁeld at the
sensor node will change when a vehicle passes by. This paper
chooses the vehicle detection feature from the magnetic ﬁeld
direction perspective. We deﬁne A(k) as the angle between
y-axis and z-axis which can be calculated by the following
equation:
A(k) = arctan ( B
z(k)
By(k) ) (2)
where By (k) is the ﬁltered output of y-axis and Bz (k) is the
ﬁltered output of z-axis.
Fig. 5 shows the comparison of Bz (k) and A(k) when
ﬁve vehicles passed by successively. These vehicles are a
two-axle truck, a minibus, a pickup, a van and a two-axle truck
respectively in order. The vehicle signals of Bz (k) usually
only have upward changes. However, observing the forth
vehicle signal of Bz (k) which created by a van, it can be
seen that this signal has both upward and downward changes.
Compared with B
z (k), the whole ﬁve vehicle signals of A(k)
almost only have downward changes. This behavior makes
A(k) very suitable for vehicle d etection, because too much
vibrations in the signal can easily cause repetitive detections
of a single vehicle. Therefore, the feature A(k) we proposed
is more stable and more uniform than the commonly used
feature Bz (k). Also, compared with the feathers used in other
researches, such as cross correlation coefﬁcient and variance
weighting, A(k) is computationally simple and has less impact
on the real-time running of the sensor node’s processor.
B. Vehicle Detection Algorithm
As mentioned above, the angle between y-axis and z-axis is
chosen for vehicle detection. Based on this feature, an adaptive
threshold state machine algorithm is designed for detecting
vehicles in moving trafﬁc. The main reason for using a
threshold method instead of other statistical methods is to
decrease the calculation amount of the sensor node’s processor.
As a result, the detection algorithm can efﬁciently conduct on
Fig. 5. Comparison of Bz (k) and A(k) signals.
the sensor node’s processor and the detection results can be
generated in real time.
1) Adaptive Baseline: Two scenarios will cause uncontrol-
lable drifts in the magnetic signal. One scenario comes from
the fact that mother nature will change the earth’s magnetic
ﬁeld by small amounts day-to-day and minute-to-minute.
Another scenario occurs when temperature on the magnetic
sensor changes rapidly. The worst case is on summer cloudy
days when the sun comes out of the clouds and suddenly
begins baking the housing of the sensor [14]. When the
magnetic sensor system works for a long time, these drifts may
result of failures if using ﬁxed threshold detection methods.
In order to eliminate the inﬂuence of drifts in a long time,
an adaptive baseline is ﬁrst set up to trace the background
magnetic readings which can be obtained in the absence of
vehicles. Then the adaptive threshold level can be determined
by the baseline for the detection state machine. The adaptive
baselines for three magnetic sensor axes are calculated by the
following equation:
L
i (k) = 1
N
k∑
j=k− N+1
Bi ( j ) fo r i ∈{ x, y, z} (3)
Where Li (k) is the adaptive baseline, Bi (k) is the ﬁltered
magnetic signal, and the subscript i represents one of the
three axes. The adaptive baseline is only updated on condition
that the variance of last successive N readings of each axis
is no more than V0. V0 represents the variance of successive
N readings of each axis when there are no vehicle and other
ferrous things around the sensor node. In this way, the baseline
of each axis can be accurately updated with no interference.
Then, the baseline of A(k) can also be updated by (2).
2) Threshold Selection: A threshold of the variation of A(k)
based on the baseline should be set to distinguish whether
there is a vehicle passing by or not. By analyzing a quantity
of vehicle signals, the threshold level can be empirically
selected. Because of the large ﬂuctuations on A(k),a l m o s t
each vehicle driving in the adj acent lane can be detected by
casually choosing a threshold around the baseline. However,
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:27:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 5 =====

W ANGet al.: ROADSIDE MAGNETIC SENSOR SYSTEM FOR VEHICLE DETECTION IN URBAN ENVIRONMENTS 1369
Fig. 6. Vehicle detection results of varying thresholds.
many vehicles driving in the nonadjacent lane can also be
detected if the threshold is too low. Since the application
of this research is to measure trafﬁc in the adjacent lane,
vehicle detections in the nona djacent lane is undesired. As a
result, a suitable threshold should be selected to ensure the
accuracy in the adjacent lane and reduce the detections in the
nonadjacent lane as far as possible at the same time.
A dataset composed of 44 vehicles in the adjacent lane and
75 vehicles in the nonadjacent lane is used for evaluating the
threshold. Values range from 0.01 rad to 0.02 rad are selected
as the threshold of A(k) to analysis the effect. This range is
empirically chosen for the reason that vehicle detection is quite
inaccurate out of this range. If the threshold is set lower, more
extra detections generate by nonadjacent vehicles or signal
noise. If the threshold is set higher, more small vehicles in
the adjacent lane cannot be detected. The relationship between
detected vehicles and varying threshold is shown in Fig. 6. The
blue curve and the red curve rep resent the detected vehicles
in the adjacent lane and in the nonadjacent lane respectively.
Both of these two curves have a declining trend, because more
and more vehicle cannot pass through the threshold when the
threshold grows. It can be seen that the 44 vehicles in the
adjacent lane are all correctly detected when the threshold
ranges from 0.01 rad to 0.0165 rad. Then the detection
rate decreases afterwards. When it comes to vehicles in the
nonadjacent lane, the detection rate keeps going down when
the threshold increases. As is discussed before, a threshold
should be chosen to maximize the detection rate in the adjacent
lane and reduce the detecti ons in the nonadjacent lane as far
as possible. Therefore, 0.0165 rad is selected as the threshold,
because this value keeps a 100% de tection rate in the adjacent
lane and a relatively low detection rate in the nonadjacent lane.
3) Detection State Machine: The adaptive threshold can
be easily calculated based on the adaptive baseline and the
selected threshold which mentioned above. In general cases,
there should be two thresholds that one is above the baseline
and the other is underneath the baseline. However, this paper
only cares about the latter because the feature A(k) almost
Fig. 7. State machine diagram of vehicle detection algorithm.
only has downward changes when vehicles passing through
the detection area. In this way, the computational complexity
of the detection algorithm can be reduced.
T (k) is deﬁned as the threshold underneath the baseline.
Then A(k)< T (k) represents that the signal strength exceeds
the threshold and this means that a vehicle is entering the
detection area. Similarly, A(k) ≥ T (k) represents that the
signal strength stays around the baseline and does not surpass
the threshold. This means that the place near the sensor
node is in the absence of vehicles. Therefore in the detection
state machine, if the successive sequence of A(k)< T (k)
is up to a critical value M, a vehicle is detected. If the
successive sequence of A(k) ≥ T (k) is up to a critical value L,
the detected vehicle is leaving the detection area. The multi-
hop detection state machine is shown in Fig. 7. Its main
purpose is to convert A(k) to a binary detection ﬂag. The
logic ﬂow of the state machine is described as follows.
S1 (“Update Baseline”): Immediately after the system is
reset, there must be no vehicles in the detection area. It takes
2 seconds to initialize the baseline by calculating the average
outputs of the three axes. Then it will go into state S2. If state
S1 is reentered from state S2, the baseline will be updated
adaptively.
S2 (“Flag0: No_Vehicles”): After initializing or updating
the baseline, it will jump to this state. If the feature A(k)
exceeds the adaptive threshold T (k), it will jump to state S3.
S3 (“Count1”): If a vehicle passes by the sensor node,
it will produce a successive sequence of A(k) that exceeds
T (k). This state is set to track the sequence. Once A(k)
is
under T (k), it will get into state S4 immediately. If the number
of the successive sequence is up to a critical value M, it will
go to state S5.
S4 (“Count0”): In this state, if A(k) stays under T (k)
continuously and the number of this sequence reaches a critical
value L, it will go back to state S2. In order not to miss a
potential vehicle detection, it will jump back to the state S3 if
A(k) exceeds the threshold T (k) again.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:27:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 6 =====

1370 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, MAY 2018
Fig. 8. Vehicle signals and detection ﬂags.
S5 (“Flag1: Vehicl e_Detected”): Getting into this state
indicates that a vehicle is successfully detected and staying
in state S5 means that the vehicle is still near the sensor
node. Consequently, the binary detection ﬂag is set to 1 in
the whole S5. If A(k) stays under T (k) successively and the
number of this sequence reaches a critical value L,w h i c h
means the vehicle has left the d etection area, it will go back
to state S2 and start waiting for a vehicle again.
By running the aforementioned detection state machine,
the binary detection ﬂag D(k) can be generated accordingly.
Only in state S5, the ﬂag is set to 1. And in other four states,
the ﬂag remains at 0. Fig. 8 shows the comparison of vehicle
signals and detection ﬂags. In this ﬁgure, three vehicles pass
over the sensor node successively and cause three obvious
downward changes in A(k). Each detection ﬂag changes to
1 shortly after the corresponding vehicle signal. Since the
values of M and L are set to 9 and 12 respectively, the slight
time delay between a vehicle signal and its detection ﬂag is
within 12 measurements. This costs about 0.24s for the sample
rate is set to 50 Hz. As a result, the detection can be informed
to the processor within 0.24s. Considering that the detection
algorithm is simple to compute and has a short time delay,
it can be efﬁciently implemented in the sensor node, and the
sensor node can generate vehicle detection report in real-time.
Compared with centralized processing systems, this distributed
processing way can reduce the data transmission and the power
consumption of the system.
IV . E
RROR REDUCTION TO THE NONADJACENT LANE
Each vehicle can apparently disturb the Earth’s magnetic
ﬁeld at a certain distance, and this distance varies in different
vehicles according to how many ferrous metals the vehicle has.
Analytical modeling and expe rimental measurements show
Fig. 9. Misjudgment in the nonadjacent lane.
that the magnetic ﬁeld intensity around a vehicle has a relation
that approximately varies as 1 /x with distance, where x is the
lateral distance from the vehicle. A Chevy Impala vehicle is
tested and it still has a slight magnetic inﬂuence at a distance
of 6 m [20], [21]. Considering that Chevy Impala is relatively
small among vehicles, the inﬂuenced distance can be longer
if the vehicle is larger than Chevy Impala.
The common lane-width in urban cities is about 3.5 m,
which means that the distance between the sensor node and
vehicles in the nonadjacent lane is about 4 m in normal
driving. Small vehicles such as sedans and Sports Utility Vehi-
cles (SUVs) may have a slight magnetic disturbance on the
sensor node and they can be ignored by setting a suitable
threshold level. However, large vehicles such as vans, buses
and trucks may have a strong magnetic effect that can cause
false detections to the system. Fig. 9 shows the four vehicles
that go through the direction area successively. In this ﬁgure,
the second vehicle is the only vehicle which passes by in the
adjacent lane and it is correc tly detected. The third and
the fourth vehicles are two sedans. They are neglected by
the detection algorithm, because the signal strength is too low
and does not exceed the threshold. The ﬁrst vehicle is a truck
in the nonadjacent lane which still has a strong effect on the
sensor node. It runs across the threshold and causes a false
detection to the system. This circumstance occurs in urban
cities from time to time and the probability of these extra
detections in the nonadjacent l ane rises when there are more
large vehicles driving on the road.
In vehicle detection applications, the magnetic sensor can
be embedded in the middle of the lane or be placed at the side
of the road. The two conﬁgurations both generate detections of
vehicles in the nonadjacent lan e. In the former conﬁguration,
if the road only has two lanes, the sensor can be slightly
located toward the outer lane edges to gain a bit of error
reduction [14]. But in the latter conﬁguration, setting the
sensor node father from the lane cannot help, because small
vehicles in the adjacent lane will generate a lower signal and
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:27:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 7 =====

W ANGet al.: ROADSIDE MAGNETIC SENSOR SYSTEM FOR VEHICLE DETECTION IN URBAN ENVIRONMENTS 1371
Fig. 10. Use of V and A to reduce error detections in the nonadjacent lane.
be ignored by the detection threshold. The similar solution
that increasing the threshold is also a useless way to solve
this problem. Although it can reduce the probability of extra
detections, a larger threshold will also prevent a part of small
vehicles in the adjacent lane fro m being detected [22]. This is
also proven by practical tests in the previous section. In order
to relieve this problem, in [23], two magnetic sensor nodes are
placed beside the lane edge in different distance. An estimate
of the lateral distance of the vehicle is obtained by simply
evaluating the ratio of the maximum of the measured magnetic
ﬁelds between the two sensors. By this way, the detections
in the nonadjacent lane can be efﬁciently reduced. However,
in this paper, only one sensor node is used to correct the false
detections and the method is proposed as follows.
Since each vehicle consists of ma ny different ferrous parts
and the magnetic ﬁeld intensity produced by the vehicle
drops off at a rapid rate with increasing distance from the
vehicle. As a result, the lower the distance from the vehicle
is, the more drastic ﬂuctuations the magnetic ﬁeld around has.
In order to reﬂect these ﬂuctuations, three magnetic sensors
are implemented at different heights on the sensor node, and
the variance of the peak value of each sensor’s z-axis signals is
calculated when a vehicle passes by. This variance is deﬁned
as V in this paper, and the smaller V is, the farther the vehicle
is likely to be. In addition, a vehicle that goes through in the
nonadjacent lane usually has a much lower peak value A
max
compared to a vehicle that passe s in the adjacent lane. These
two parameters can be combined together to classify whether
the vehicle is driving in t he adjacent lane or not.
A data set shows that when 115 vehicles passed by in the
adjacent lane are correctly detected, there are also undesired
20 vehicles passed by in the nonadjacent being detected.
If taking no solutions, these misjudged 20 vehicles will be
classiﬁed as the vehicles in the adjacent lane, and it leads the
total misclassiﬁcation rate up to 14.8% in these 135 vehicles.
Fig. 10 shows the result of applying the proposed method
to the data set. A simple linear classiﬁcation line was set to
differentiate the two classes as much as possible. By using
this method, ﬁnally, only 5 vehicles in the adjacent lane and
3 vehicles in the nonadjacent lane are misclassiﬁed. As a
Fig. 11. The scene of on-road experiment.
result, the total misclassiﬁcation rate is reduced from 14.8% to
5.9% efﬁciently, and it makes the number of false detections
of the system acceptable.
V. E
XPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
The experimental test was conducted at S227 Road in
Xiang-cheng District, Suzhou, China. This road has two
lanes with one driving direction from south to north. Since,
S227 Road is mainly responsible for shipping the goods, there
are more large vehicles driving on this road and the false
detection rate of vehicles in the nonadjacent lane can be higher
than that on other common city roads. Therefore, this road
was typically chosen for the research of false detections. The
test was proceeded in a sunny morning and the temperature
was about 26 degrees centigrade. The system devices were
placed in the left side of moving vehicles. An LTI20-20 Laser
velocimeter was used to obtain the speed of vehicles. During
the test, the trafﬁc was running normally and the distance
between every two vehicles wa s relatively high. The speed
of vehicles ranged from 32 km/h to 67 km/h during the
experiments. Fig. 11 shows the test site. The sensor node was
placed just next to the lane edge. The sink node and the laptop
were deployed several meters away from the road. A video
camera was used to shoot local videos, so that the actual
vehicles can be counted manually to ensure the accuracy. Since
the trial road has two lanes, the system performance in two
different scenarios can be both tested. The one scenario is a
single-lane road, in which there is no interference caused by
the vehicles driving in other lanes. The other scenario is a
two-lane road which will generate false detections by vehicles
driving in the nonadjacent lane.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:27:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 8 =====

1372 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, MAY 2018
TABLE I
RESULT OF THE SINGLE -L ANE SCENARIO
TABLE II
DETECTION RATE DISTRIBUTION OF THE VEHICLES
IN THE NONADJACENT LANE
The experimental test lasted about one hour. After scanning
the recorded video, 81 vehicles in the adjacent lane and
95 vehicles in the nonadjacent lane were manually observed.
By using the proposed vehicle detection algorithm, 79 out
of 81 vehicles in the adjacent lan e were correctly detected.
Table I shows the result and the detection accuracy is up
to 97.5%. It indicates that the detection system can achieve
high accuracy in the single-lane scenario. Among the observed
95 vehicles in the nonadjacen t lane, 39 vehicles produced
a strong signal and were also detected. The probability of
generating extra detections in these vehicles is 41.1% and
it causes serious excessive detections to the system. If not
solving this problem, the system just cannot work in two-lane
scenarios normally because only v ehicles in the adjacent lane
are desired. Table II shows the speciﬁc vehicle types and each
detection rate in these 95 vehicles. Among the 39 miscounted
vehicles in the nonadjacent lane, only 4 vehicles are small
vehicles (sedans, SUVs, pickups, and minibuses) and the
remaining 35 vehicles are large vehicles (buses, vans, two
and three axle trucks, and four to six axle trucks). Therefore,
the ratio of large vehicles is 89.7% in the miscounted vehicles.
It can be seen that false detections are almost created by large
vehicles. If there is a bus, a van or a four to six truck goes
through the nonadjacent lane, the system is bound to generate
an extra detection. As a result, the system performance are
highly relevant to the ratio of large vehicles driving on the
monitored road. In other words, the more large vehicles
passing by in the nonadjacent lan e, the more extra detections
generated by the system.
Combining two-lane vehicle s together, 118 vehicles are
detected. Since 39 out of 118 vehicles are extra detections
which caused by nonadjacent vehic les, the misclassiﬁcation
rate is 33.1%. After the processing of error reduction method
which mentioned in Section IV , the misclassiﬁed vehicles are
reduced to 18 and the misclassiﬁcation rate drops to 15.3%.
TABLE III
RESULT OF THE TWO-L ANE SCENARIO
TABLE IV
COMPARISON WITH SABER TAGHV AEEYAN ’s WORK
The result is shown in Table III. It indicates that the system
performance has improved a lot after using the proposed
method. Compared with the previous data set, the misclas-
siﬁcation rate has a little increase because there were more
large vehicles driving in the trial road.
To sum up, the experimental results show that the magnetic
sensor system can achieve high detection accuracy in single-
lane road and the accuracy is up to 97.5%. When measuring
two-lane roads, large vehicles passing by in the nonadjacent
lane may cause false detections with high possibility. After
using the error reduction method, the misclassiﬁcation rate
has dropped from 33.1% to 15.3%. Thus the system can
also work in two-lane roads efﬁciently. This work has some
improvements on the relevant researches in the past few
years. Compared with [2], [10], and [19], the sensor node is
implemented at roadside instead of the center of the road. This
way can signifycantly reduce the cost and difﬁculty of device
installation and maintenance. Compared with [3] and [13],
false detections generated by vehicles in the nonadjacent lane
are considered and a method is proposed to reduce these errors.
Regarding the whole work presented in this paper, a highly
relevant research is done by Taghvaeeyan and Rajamani [23]
at the University of Minnesota. Their research is summarized
in [23] in 2014. The detailed comparison between this paper
and Saber Taghvaeeyan’s work is listed in Table IV . The
two researches both implement the sensor node at roadside.
To detect vehicles, this paper uses an adaptive threshold
algorithm to overcome the drifts of magnetic ﬁeld rather than
a ﬁxed threshold algorithm used in [23]. Both of these two
works took the false detecti ons created by vehicles in the
nonadjacent lane into consideration. Two sensor nodes were
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:27:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 9 =====

W ANGet al.: ROADSIDE MAGNETIC SENSOR SYSTEM FOR VEHICLE DETECTION IN URBAN ENVIRONMENTS 1373
implemented in Saber Taghvaeeyan’s research and a Support
Vector Machine (SVM) is used to classify the vehicles in
different lanes. While in this paper, only one sensor node is
implemented and the linear classiﬁcation method is simply
applied. It costs less resources in hardware device. In one-lane
ﬁeld test, the two researches both achieve high detection
accuracy. When handling with the problem of false detections
in the nonadjacent lane, Saber Taghvaeeyan’s work reduced
the misclassiﬁcation rate from 8% to 1%. And the rate was
reduced from 33.1% to 15.3% in this paper. It is hard to
compare the two data directly because of the different test
roads. However, it can be seen that both of the two researches
can alleviate the problem of false detections efﬁciently.
VI. C
ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS
In this paper, a portable vehicle detection system based on
magnetic sensors is proposed. Unlike the traditional inductive
loop systems and video camera systems, this solution is of low
installation complexity and low cost. It can be implemented
at the side of the road conveniently and does not interfere the
trafﬁc during the time of installation and maintenance. In addi-
tion, the system transmits data by wireless communication.
Thus, it is also scalable. The experimental results show that
the system achieves high detec tion accuracy in the one-lane
scenario. The proposed error reduction method can decrease
false detections in the two-lane scenario, but it cannot provide
accurate vehicle detection a nd needs more research.
Since only vehicles driving at a normal speed is tested
in this research, the system performance may have trouble
dealing with congested trafﬁc, in which the vehicle distance
is very close to each other and the vehicle magnetic signals
may have strong mutual effects. Consequently, vehicle detec-
tion methods for low-speed trafﬁc will be researched in the
future. Regarding ZigBee network, only one point-to-point
link is implemented in this research. This is just a preliminary
communication model which is applied in one-node scenario.
A more practical network that can be utilized in multi-node
scenario will be researched. In a ddition, vehicle classiﬁcation
is also a research hotspot and will be investigated as well.
R
EFERENCES
[1] M. Tubaishat, P. Zhuang, Q. Qi, and Y . Shang, “Wireless sensor net-
works in intelligent transportation systems,” Wireless. Commun. Mobile
Comput., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 287–302, 2009.
[2] S. Y . Cheung and P. Varaiya, “Trafﬁc surveillance by wireless sensor
networks: Final report,” Califor nia PATH, San Francisco, CA, USA,
Res. Rep. UCB-ITS-PRR-2007-4, Jan. 2007.
[3] J. Lan, Y . Xiang, L. Wang, and Y . Shi, “Vehicle detection and classi-
ﬁcation by measuring and processing magnetic signal,” Measurement,
vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 174–180, 2011.
[4] F. Losilla, A.-J. Garcia-Sanchez, F. Garcia-Sanchez, J. Garcia-Haro, and
Z. J. Haas, “A comprehensive appro ach to WSN-based its applications:
As u r v e y , ”Sensors, vol. 11, no. 11, pp. 10220–10265, Oct. 2011.
[5] W. Chen, L. Chen, Z. Chen, and S. Tu, “WITS: A wireless sensor net-
work for intelligent transportation system,” in Proc. IMSCCS, Hangzhou,
China, Jun. 2006, pp. 635–641.
[6] Summary of Vehicle Detection and Surveillance Technologies Used in
Intelligent Transportation Systems , SWTDI, NMSU, Las Cruces, NM,
USA, Nov. 2000.
[7] Y . Jo and I. Jung, “Analysis of vehicle detection with WSN-based
ultrasonic sensors,” Sensors, vol. 14, no. 8, pp. 14050–14069, Aug. 2014.
[8] E. Sifuentes, O. Casas, and R. Pallas-Areny, “Wireless magnetic sensor
node for vehicle detection with optical wake-up,” IEEE Sensors J. ,
vol. 11, no. 8, pp. 1669–1676, Aug. 2011.
[9] Q. Wang, J. Zheng, B. Xu, and Y . Hu ang, “Analysis and experiments
of vehicle detection with magnetic sensors in urban environments,” in
Proc. IEEE CYBER , Shenyang, China, Jun. 2015, pp. 71–75.
[10] S. Y . Cheung, S. Coleri, B. D undar, S. Ganesh, C. W. Tan, and
P. Varaiya, “Trafﬁc measurement and vehicle classiﬁcation with sin-
gle magnetic sensor,” Transp. Res. Rec., J. Transp. Res. Board ,
vol. 1917, pp. 173–181, Jan. 2005. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.
org/10.3141/1917-19
[11] W. Zhang, G. Tan, and N. Ding, “Vehicle speed estimation based on
sensor networks and signal correlation measurement,” in Proc. CCIS ,
vol. 418. 2014, pp. 1–12.
[12] R. Wang, L. Zhang, R. Sun, J. Gong, and L. Cui, “EasiTia: A per-
vasive trafﬁc information acquisition system based on wireless sensor
networks,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 615–621,
Jun. 2011.
[13] B. Yang and Y . Lei, “Vehicle detection and classiﬁcation for low-
speed congested trafﬁc with anisotropic magnetoresistive sensor,” IEEE
Sensors J., vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 1132–1138, Feb. 2015.
[14] M. J. Caruso and L. S. Withanawasam, “Vehicle detection and compass
applications using AMR magnetic sensors,” inProc. Sensors Expo, 1999,
pp. 1–13.
[15] Honeywell International Inc ., Plymouth, MN, USA. (Feb. 2013).
3-Axis Digital Compass IC Datasheet . [Online]. Available: http://
www51.honeywell.com/aero/common/documents/myaerospacecatalog-
documents/Defense_Brochures-documents/HMC5883L_3-Axis_Digital
_Compass_IC.pdf
[16] K. Selvarajah, B. Arief, A. Tu lly, and P. Blythe, “Deploying wire-
less sensor devices in intelligent transportation system applications,”
in Intelligent Transportation Systems . Rijeka, Croatia: InTech, 2012,
pp. 143–168.
[17] P. Baronti, P. Pillai, V . W. C. Chook, S. Chessa, A. Gotta, and Y . F. Hu,
“Wireless sensor networks: A survey on the state of the art and the
802.15.4 and ZigBee standards,” Comput. Commun , vol. 30, no. 7,
pp. 1655–1695, 2007.
[18] J. Zheng et al., “Non-intrusive trafﬁc data collection with wireless sensor
networks for intelligent transportation systems,” Adhoc Sensors Wireless
Netw., vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 41–57, 2016.
[19] I. Jolevski, A. Markoski, and R. Pasic, “Smart vehicle sensing and
classiﬁcation node with energy aware v ehicle classiﬁcation algorithm,”
in Proc. ITI, Cavtat, Croatia, Jun. 2011, pp. 409–414.
[20] S. Taghvaeeyan and R. Rajamani, “Use of vehicle magnetic signa-
tures for position estimation,” Appl. Phys. Lett. , vol. 99, no. 13,
pp. 134101-1–134101-3, Sep. 2011.
[21] S. Taghvaeeyan and R. Rajamani, “The development of vehicle position
estimation algorithms based on the use of AMR sensors,” IEEE Trans.
Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 1845–1854, Dec. 2012.
[22] F. Ahdi, M. K. Khandani, M. Hamedi, and A. Haghani, “Trafﬁc
data collection and anonymous vehicl e detection using wireless sensor
networks,” Dept. Civil Environ. Eng., Univ. Maryland, College Park,
College Park, MD, USA, Tech. Rep. MD-12-SP009B4H, 2012.
[23] S. Taghvaeeyan and R. Rajamani, “Po rtable roadside sensors for vehicle
counting, classiﬁcation, and speed measurement,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
Transp. Syst., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 73–83, Feb. 2014.
Qing Wang received the B.S. degree from Soochow
University in 2014, where he is currently pursu-
ing the master’s degree with the School of Urban
Rail Transportation. His research interests include
wireless sensor networks and its applications in
intelligent transportation systems.Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:27:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 10 =====

1374 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 19, NO. 5, MAY 2018
Jianying Zheng received the B.S. degree from the
University of Science and Technology of China
in 2004, and the Ph.D. degree from the Shenyang
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sci-
ences, in 2010. He is currently an Associate Profes-
sor with the School of Urban Rail Transportation,
Soochow University. His research interests include
wireless sensor networks, intelligent transportation
systems, and multiagent systems.
Hao Xu received the Ph.D. degree in civil engi-
neering from Texas Tech University. He was a
Research Associate with the TransTech Laboratory,
Texas Tech University. He joined the Faculty at the
Department of Civil & Envi ronmental Engineering,
University of Nevada, Reno, as an Assistant Profes-
sor in 2013.
His main areas of research include intelligent
transportation systems, trafﬁc operation and control,
evacuation transportation planning and management,
and the development of applications for transporta-
tion engineering. In addition to research and projects, he also teaches
graduate and undergraduate courses o f Highway Geometric Design, Trafﬁc
Engineering, and Intelligent Transportation Systems. He is an Active Member
of several professional societies, such as the Transportation Research Board,
the American Society of Civil Engineers, and the Institute of Transportation
Engineers.
Bin Xu received the B.S. degree from Soochow
University in 2015, where he is currently pursu-
ing the master’s degree with the School of Urban
Rail Transportation. His research interests include
wireless sensor networks and its applications in
intelligent transportation systems.
Rong Chen received the Ph.D. degree in signal and
information processing from Soochow University
in 2013. She is currently a Lecturer with the School
of Urban Rail Transportation, Soochow University.
Her research interests include communication signal
processing and joint time-frequency analysis.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:27:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 