

===== PAGE 1 =====

Citation: Syed, T.A.; Siddiqui, M.S.;
Abdullah, H.B.; Jan, S.; Namoun, A.;
Alzahrani, A.; Nadeem, A.; Alkhodre,
A.B. In-Depth Review of Augmented
Reality: Tracking Technologies,
Development Tools, AR Displays,
Collaborative AR, and Security
Concerns. Sensors 2023, 23, 146.
https://doi.org/10.3390/s23010146
Academic Editors: Calin Gheorghe
Dan Neamtu, Radu Comes, Jing-Jing
Fang and Dorin-Mircea Popovici
Received: 25 October 2022
Revised: 11 December 2022
Accepted: 13 December 2022
Published: 23 December 2022
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
sensors
Review
In-Depth Review of Augmented Reality: Tracking Technologies,
Development Tools, AR Displays, Collaborative AR,
and Security Concerns
Toqeer Ali Syed 1, Muhammad Shoaib Siddiqui 1
 , Hurria Binte Abdullah 2
 , Salman Jan 3,4,*
 ,
Abdallah Namoun 1
 , Ali Alzahrani 1, Adnan Nadeem 1 and Ahmad B. Alkhodre 1
1 Faculty of Computer and Information Systems, Islamic University of Madinah, Medina 42351, Saudi Arabia
2 School of Social Sciences and Humanities, National University of Science and Technology (NUST),
Islamabad 44000, Pakistan
3 Malaysian Institute of Information Technology, Universiti Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur 50250, Malaysia
4 Department of Computer Science, Bacha Khan University Charsadda, Charsadda 24420, Pakistan
* Correspondence: salman.jan@unikl.edu.my
Abstract: Augmented reality (AR) has gained enormous popularity and acceptance in the past few
years. AR is indeed a combination of different immersive experiences and solutions that serve as
integrated components to assemble and accelerate the augmented reality phenomena as a workable
and marvelous adaptive solution for many realms. These solutions of AR include tracking as a means
for keeping track of the point of reference to make virtual objects visible in a real scene. Similarly,
display technologies combine the virtual and real world with the user’s eye. Authoring tools provide
platforms to develop AR applications by providing access to low-level libraries. The libraries can
thereafter interact with the hardware of tracking sensors, cameras, and other technologies. In addition
to this, advances in distributed computing and collaborative augmented reality also need stable
solutions. The various participants can collaborate in an AR setting. The authors of this research
have explored many solutions in this regard and present a comprehensive review to aid in doing
research and improving different business transformations. However, during the course of this study,
we identiﬁed that there is a lack of security solutions in various areas of collaborative AR (CAR),
speciﬁcally in the area of distributed trust management in CAR. This research study also proposed a
trusted CAR architecture with a use-case of tourism that can be used as a model for researchers with
an interest in making secure AR-based remote communication sessions.
Keywords: trusted augmented reality; augmented reality review; collaborative augmented reality;
virtual reality review; display and tracking technology; display technologies in augmented reality
1. Introduction
Augmented reality (AR) is one of the leading expanding immersive experiences of
the 21st century. AR has brought a revolution in different realms including health and
medicine, teaching and learning, tourism, designing, manufacturing, and other similar in-
dustries whose acceptance accelerated the growth of AR in an unprecedentedmanner [1–3].
According to a recent report in September 2022, the market size of AR and VR reached USD
27.6 billion in 2021, which is indeed estimated to reach USD 856.2 billion by the end of the
year 2031 [4]. Big companies largely use AR-based technologies. For instance, Amazon, one
of the leading online shopping websites, uses this technology to make it easier for customers
to decide the type of furniture they want to buy. The rise in mobile phone technology also
acted as an accelerator in popularizing AR. Earlier, mobile phones were not advanced and
capable enough to run these applications due to their low graphics. Nowadays, however,
smart devices are capable enough to easily run AR-based applications. A lot of research
has been done on mobile-based AR. Lee et al. [5] developed a user-based design interface
Sensors 2023, 23, 146. https://doi.org/10.3390/s23010146 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors

===== PAGE 2 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 2 of 54
for educational purpose in mobile AR. To evaluate its conduct, fourth-grade elementary
students were selected.
The adoption of AR in its various perspectives is backed up by a prolonged history.
This paper presents an overview of the different integrated essential components that con-
tribute to the working framework of AR, and the latest developments on these components
are collected, analyzed, and presented, while the developments in the smart devices and
the overall experience of the users have changed drastically [ 6]. The tracking technolo-
gies [7] are the building blocks of AR and establish a point of reference for movement
and for creating an environment where the virtual and real objects are presented together.
To achieve a real experience with augmented objects, several tracking technologies are pre-
sented which include techniques such as sensor-based [8], markerless, marker-based [9,10],
and hybrid tracking technologies. Among these different technologies, hybrid tracking
technologies are the most adaptive. As part of the framework constructed in this study,
the simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) and inertial tracking technologies are
combined. The SLAM technology collects points through cameras in real scenes while the
point of reference is created using inertial tracking . The virtual objects are inserted on the
relevant points of reference to create an augmented reality. Moreover, this paper analyzes
and presents a detailed discussion on different tracking technologies according to their
use in different realms i.e., in education, industries, and medical ﬁelds. Magnetic tracking
is widely used in AR systems in medical, maintenance, and manufacturing. Moreover,
vision-based tracking is mostly used in mobile phones and tablets because they have screen
and camera, which makes them the best platform for AR. In addition, GPS tracking is
useful in the ﬁelds of military, gaming, and tourism. These tracking technologies along
with others are explained in detail in Section 3.
Once the points of reference are collected after tracking, then another important factor
that requires signiﬁcant accuracy is to determine at which particular point the virtual objects
have to be mixed with the real environment. Here comes the role of display technologies
that gives the users of augmented reality an environment where the real and virtual objects
are displayed visually. Therefore, display technologies are one of the key components of AR.
This research identiﬁes state-of-the-art display technologies that help to provide a quality
view of real and virtual objects. Augmented reality displays can be divided into various
categories. All have the same task to show the merged image of real and virtual content to
the user’s eye. The authors have categorized the latest technologies of optical display after
the advancements in holographic optical elements (HOEs). There are other categories of
AR displays, such as video-based, eye multiplexed, and projected onto a physical surface.
Optical see-through has two sub-categories, one is a free-space combiner and the other is a
wave-guide combiner [11,12]. The thorough details of display technologies are presented
in Section 4.
To develop these AR applications, different tools are used depending on the type of
application used. For example, to develop a mobile-based AR application for Android
or iOS, ARToolKit [ 13] is used. However, FLARToolKit [ 14] is used to create a web-
based application using Flash. Moreover, there are various plug-ins available that can be
integrated with Unity [15] to create AR applications. These development tools are reviewed
in Section 6 of this paper. Figure 1 provides an overview of reviewed topics of augmented
reality in this paper.

===== PAGE 3 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 3 of 54
Figure 1. Overview of AR, VR, and collaborative AR applications, tools, and technologies.
After going through a critical review process of collaborative augmented reality,
the research has identiﬁed that some security ﬂaws and missing trust parameters need
to be addressed to ensure a pristine environment is provided to the users. Hackers and
intruders are always active to exploit different vulnerabilities in the systems and software,
but the previous research conducted on collaborative augmented reality did not depict
reasonable efforts made in this direction to make secure collaboration. To address the
security ﬂaws and to provide secure communication in collaborative augmented reality,
this research considered it appropriate to come up with a security solution and framework
that can limit danger and risks that may be posed in the form of internal and external attacks.
To actualize the secure platform, this study came up with an architecture for presenting a
secure collaborative AR in the tourism sector in Saudi Arabia as a case study. The focus
of the case study is to provide an application that can guide tourists during their visit to
any of the famous landmarks in the country. This study proposed a secure and trustful
mobile application based on collaborative AR for tourists. In this application, the necessary
information is rendered on screen and the user can hire a guide to provide more information
in detail. A single guide can provide the services to a group of tourists visiting the same
landmark. A blockchain network was used to secure the applications and protect the
private data of the users [ 16,17]. For this purpose, we performed a thorough literature
review for an optimized solution regarding security and tracking for which we studies the
existing tracking technologies and listed them in this paper along with their limitations.
In our use case, we used a GPS tracking system to track the user’s movement and provide
the necessary information about the visited landmark through the mobile application.
Observing the fact that AR operates in an integrated fashion that combines different
technologies including tracking technologies, display technologies, AR tools, collaborative
AR, and applications of AR has encouraged us to explore and present these conceptions and
technologies in detail. To facilitate researchers on these different techniques, the authors
have explored the research previously conducted and presented it in a Venn diagram, as
shown in Figure 2. Interested investigators can choose their required area of research in
AR. As can be seen in the diagram, most research has been done in the area of tracking
technologies. This is further divided into different types of tracking solutions including
ﬁducial tracking, video-based tracking, and inertial tracking. Some papers lie in several
categories for, example some papers such as [18–20] fall in both the ﬁducial tracking and
sensor categories. Similarly, computer vision and display devices have some common
papers, and inertial tracking and video-based tracking also have some papers in common.
In addition, display devices share common papers with computer vision, mobile AR, design
guidelines, tool-kits, evaluation, AR tags, and security and privacy of AR. Furthermore,
visualization has different papers in common with business, interior design, and human–
robot communication. While education shares some paper with gaming, simulation,
medicine, heritage, and manufacturing. In short, we have tried to summarize all papers
and further elaborate in their sections for the convenience of the reader.

===== PAGE 4 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 4 of 54
Papers related to Tracking, Display, Authoring Tools,
Application, and security
Paper that Cover Collaborative Aug-
mented Reality Only
Figure 2. Classiﬁcation of reviewed papers with respect to tracking, display, authoring tools, applica-
tion, Collaborative and security
Contribution: This research presents a comprehensive review of AR and its associated
technologies. A review of state-of-the-art tracking and display technologies is presented fol-
lowed by different essential components and tools that can be used to effectively create AR
experiences. The study also presents the newly emerging technologies such as collaborative
augmented reality and how different application interactions are carried out. During the
review phase, the research identiﬁed that the AR-based solutions and particularly collab-
orative augmented reality solutions are vulnerable to external intrusion. It is identiﬁed
that these solutions lack security and the interaction could be hijacked, manipulated, and
sometimes exposed to potential threats. To address these concerns, this research felt the
need to ensure that the communication has integrity; henceforth, the research utilizes the
state-of-the-art blockchain infrastructure for the collaborating applications in AR. The pa-
per further proposes complete secure framework wherein different applications working
remotely have a real feeling of trust with each other [21].
Outline: This paper presents the overview of augmented reality and its applications
in various realms in Section 2. In Section 3, tracking technologies are presented, while a
detailed overview of the display technologies is provided in Section 4. Section 6 apprises
readers on AR development tools. Section 7 highlights the collaborative research on
augmented reality, while Section 8 interprets the AR interaction and input technologies.
The paper presents the details of design guidelines and interface patterns in Section 9, while
Section 10 discusses the security and trust issues in collaborative AR. Section 12 highlights
future directions for research, while Section 13 concludes this research.
2. Augmented Reality Overview
People, for many years, have been using lenses, light sources, and mirrors to create
illusions and virtual images in the real world [22–24]. However, Ivan Sutherland was the
ﬁrst person to truly generate the AR experience. Sketchpad, developed at MIT in 1963 by
Ivan Sutherland, is the world’s ﬁrst interactive graphic application [25]. In Figure 3, we
have given an overview of the development of AR technology from the beginning to 2022.
Bottani et al. [26] reviews the AR literature published during the time period of 2006–2017.
Moreover, Sereno et al. [27] use a systematic survey approach to detail the existing literature
available on the intersection of computer-supported collaborative work and AR.

===== PAGE 5 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 5 of 54
Figure 3. Augmented reality advancement over time for the last 60 years.
2.1. Head-Mounted Display
Ens et al. [28] review the existing work on design exploration for mixed-scale gestures
where the Hololens AR display is used to interweave larger gestures with micro-gestures.
2.2. AR T owards Applications
ARToolKit tracking library [13] aimed to provide the computer vision tracking of
a square marker in real-time which ﬁxed two major problems, i.e., enabling interaction
with real-world objects and secondly, the user’s viewpoint tracking system. Researchers
conducted studies to develop handheld AR systems. Hettig et al. [ 29] present a system
called “Augmented Visualization Box” to asses surgical augmented reality visualizations in
a virtual environment. Goh et al. [30] present details of the critical analysis of 3D interaction
techniques in mobile AR. Kollatsch et al. [31] introduce a system that creates and introduces
the production data and maintenance documentation into the AR maintenance apps for
machine tools which aims to reduce the overall cost of necessary expertise and the planning
process of AR technology. Bhattacharyya et al. [32] introduce a two-player mobile AR game
known as Brick, where users can engage in synchronous collaboration while inhabiting
the real-time and shared augmented environment. Kim et al. [33] suggest that this decade
is marked by a tremendous technological boom particularly in rendering and evaluation
research while display and calibration research has declined. Liu et al. [ 34] expand the
information feedback channel from industrial robots to a human workforce for human–
robot collaboration development.
2.3. Augmented Reality for the Web
Cortes et al. [35] introduce the new techniques of collaboratively authoring surfaces
on the web using mobile AR. Qiao et al. [36] review the current implementations of mobile
AR, enabling technologies of AR, state-of-art technology, approaches for potential web AR
provisioning, and challenges that AR faces in a web-based system.
2.4. AR Application Development
The AR industry was tremendously increasing in 2015, extending from smartphones to
websites with head-worn display systems such as Google Glass. In this regard,Agati et al. [18]
propose design guidelines for the development of an AR manual assembly system which
includes ergonomics, usability, corporate-related, and cognition.
AR for Tourism and Education: Shukri et al. [37] aim to introduce the design guidelines
of mobile AR for tourism by proposing 11 principles for developing efﬁcient AR design for
tourism which reduces cognitive overload, provides learning ability, and helps explore the
content while traveling in Malaysia. In addition to it, Fallahkhair et al. [38] introduce new

===== PAGE 6 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 6 of 54
guidelines to make AR technologies with enhanced user satisfaction, efﬁciency, and effec-
tiveness in cultural and contextual learning using mobiles, thereby enhancing the tourism
experience. Akccayir et al. [39] show that AR has the advantage of placing the virtual image
on a real object in real time while pedagogical and technical issues should be addressed to
make the technology more reliable. Salvia et al. [40] suggest that AR has a positive impact
on learning but requires some advancements.
Sarkar et al. [41] present an AR app known as ScholAR. It introduces enhancing the
learning skills of the students to inculcate conceptualizing and logical thinking among
sevemth-grade students. Soleiman et al. [42] suggest that the use of AR improves abstract
writing as compared to VR.
2.5. AR Security and Privacy
Hadar et al. [43] scrutinize security at all steps of AR application development and
identify the need for new strategies for information security, privacy, and security, with a
main goal to design and introduce capturing and mapping concerns. Moreover, in the in-
dustrial arena, Mukhametshin et al. [44] focus on developing sensor tag detection, tracking,
and recognition for designing an AR client-side app for Siemen Company to monitor the
equipment for remote facilities.
3. Tracking Technology of AR
Tracking technologies introduce the sensation of motion in the virtual and augmented
reality world and perform a variety of tasks. Once a tracking system is rightly chosen and
correctly installed, it allows a person to move within a virtual and augmented environment.
It further allows us to interact with people and objects within augmented environments.
The selection of tracking technology depends on the sort of environment, the sort of data,
and the availability of required budgets. For AR technology to meet Azuma’s deﬁnition of
an augmented reality system, it must adhere to three main components:
1. it combines virtual and the real content;
2. it is interactive in real time;
3. is is registered in three dimensions.
The third condition of being “registered in three dimensions” alludes to the capability
of an AR system to project the virtual content on physical surroundings in such a way that
it seems to be part of the real world. The position and orientation (pose) of the viewer
concerning some anchor in the real world must be identiﬁed and determined for registering
the virtual content in the real environment. This anchor of the real world may be the
dead-reckoning from inertial tracking, a deﬁned location in space determined using GPS,
or a physical object such as a paper image marker or magnetic tracker source. In short, the
real-world anchor depends upon the applications and the technologies used. With respect
to the type of technology used, there are two ways of registering the AR system in 3D:
• Determination of the position and orientation of the viewer relative to the real-world
anchor: registration phase;
• Upgrading of viewer’s pose with respect to previously known pose: tracking phase.
In this document, the word “tracking” would deﬁne both phases as common termi-
nology. There are two main types of tracking techniques which are explained as follows
(depicted in Figure 4).

===== PAGE 7 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 7 of 54
Figure 4. Categorization of augmented reality tracking techniques.
3.1. Markerless T racking T echniques
Markerless tracking techniques further have two types, one is sensor based and
another is vision based.
3.1.1. Sensor-Based Tracking
Magnetic Tracking Technology: This technology includes a tracking source and two
sensors, one sensor for the head and another one for the hand. The tracking source creates
an electromagnetic ﬁeld in which the sensors are placed. The computer then calculates
the orientation and position of the sensors based on the signal attenuation of the ﬁeld.
This gives the effect of allowing a full 360 range of motion. i.e., allowing us to look all
the way around the 3D environment. It also allows us to move around all three degrees
of freedom. The hand tracker has some control buttons that allow the user to navigate
along the environment. It allows us to pick things up and understand the size and shape of
the objects [45]. In Figure 5 we have tried to draw the tracking techniques to give a better
understanding to the reader.
Figure 5. Augmented reality tracking techniques presentation.

===== PAGE 8 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 8 of 54
Frikha et al. [46] introduce a new mutual occlusion problem handler. The problem of
occlusion occurs when the real objects are in front of the virtual objects in the scene. The
authors use a 3D positioning approach and surgical instrument tracking in an AR environ-
ment. The paradigm is introduced that is based on monocular image-based processing.
The result of the experiment suggested that this approach is capable of handling mutual
occlusion automatically in real-time.
One of the main issues with magnetic tracking is the limited positioning range [47].
Orientation and position can be determined by setting up the receiver to the viewer [48].
Receivers are small and light in weight and the magnetic trackers are indifferent to optical
disturbances and occlusion; therefore, these have high update rates. However, the res-
olution magnetic ﬁeld declines with the fourth power of the distance, and the strength
of magnetic ﬁelds decline with the cube of the distance [ 49]. Therefore, the magnetic
trackers have constrained working volume. Moreover, magnetic trackers are sensitive to
environments around magnetic ﬁelds and the type of magnetic material used and are also
susceptible to measurement jitter [50].
Magnetic tracking technology is widely used in the range of AR systems, with applica-
tions ranging from maintenance [51] to medicine [52] and manufacturing [53].
Inertial Tracking: Magnetometers, accelerometers, and gyroscopes are examples of
inertial measurement units (IMU) used in inertial tracking to evaluate the velocity and ori-
entation of the tracked object. An inertial tracking system is used to ﬁnd the three rotational
degrees of freedom relative to gravity. Moreover, the time period of the trackers’ update
and the inertial velocity can be determined by the change in the position of the tracker.
Advantages of Inertial Tracking: It does not require a line of sight and has no range
limitations. It is not prone to optical, acoustic, magnetic, and RE interference sources.
Furthermore, it provides motion measurement with high bandwidth. Moreover, it has
negligible latency and can be processed as fast as one desires.
Disadvantages of Inertial Tracking: They are prone to drift of orientation and position
over time, but their major impact is on the position measurement. The rationale behind this
is that the position must be derived from the velocity measurements. The usage of a ﬁlter
could help in resolving this issue. However, the issue could while focusing on this, the ﬁlter
can decrease the responsiveness and the update rate of the tracker [54]. For the ultimate
correction of this issue of the drift, the inertial sensor should be combined with any other
kind of sensor. For instance, it could be combined with ultrasonic range measurement
devices and optical trackers.
3.1.2. Vision-Based Tracking
Vision-based tracking is deﬁned as tracking approaches that ascertain the camera pose
by the use of data captured from optical sensors and as registration. The optical sensors
can be divided into the following three categories:
• visible light tracking;
• 3D structure tracking;
• infrared tracking.
In recent times, vision-based tracking AR is becoming highly popular due to the
improved computational power of consumer devices and the ubiquity of mobile devices,
such as tablets and smartphones, thereby making them the best platform for AR technolo-
gies. Chakrabarty et al. [ 55] contribute to the development of autonomous tracking by
integrating the CMT into IBVS, their impact on the rigid deformable targets in indoor
settings, and ﬁnally the integration of the system into the Gazebo simulator. Vision-based
tracking is demonstrated by the use of an effective object tracking algorithm [56] known
as the clustering of static-adaptive correspondences for deformable object tracking (CMT).
Gupta et al. [57] detail the comparative analysis between the different types of vision-based
tracking systems.

===== PAGE 9 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 9 of 54
Moreover, Krishna et al. [58] explore the use of electroencephalogram (EEG) signals in
user authentication. User authentication is similar to facial recognition in mobile phones.
Moreover, this is also evaluated by combining it with eye-tracking data. This research con-
tributes to the development of a novel evaluation paradigm and a biometric authentication
system for the integration of these systems. Furthermore, Dzsotjan et al. [59] delineate the
usefulness of the eye-tracking data evaluated during the lectures in order to determine the
learning gain of the user. Microsoft HoloLens2’s designed Walk the Graph app was used to
generate the data. Binary classiﬁcation was performed on the basis of the kinematic graphs
which users reported of their own movement.
Ranging from smartphones to laptops and even to wearable devices with suitable
cameras located in them, visible light tracking is the most commonly used optical sensor.
These cameras are particularly important because they can both make a video of the real
environment and can also register the virtual content to it, and thereby can be used in video
see-through AR systems.
Chen et al. [60] resolve the shortcomings of the deep learning lightning model (DAM)
by combining the method of transferring a regular video to a 3D photo-realistic avatar
and a high-quality 3D face tracking algorithm. The evaluation of the proposed system
suggests its effectiveness in real-world scenarios when we have variability in expression,
pose, and illumination. Furthermore, Rambach et al. [ 61] explore the details pipeline of
6DoF object tracking using scanned 3D images of the objects. The scope of research covers
the initialization of frame-to-frame tracking, object registration, and implementation of
these aspects to make the experience more efﬁcient. Moreover, it resolves the challenges
that we faced with occlusion, illumination changes, and fast motion.
3.1.3. Three-Dimensional Structure Tracking
Three-dimensional structure information has become very affordable because of the
development of commercial sensors capable of accomplishing this task. It was begun after
the development of Microsoft Kinect [ 62]. Syahidi et al. [ 63] introduce a 3D AR-based
learning system for pre-school children. For determining the three-dimensional points
in the scene, different types of sensors could be used. The most commonly used are the
structured lights [64] or the time of ﬂight [65]. These technologies work on the principle of
depth analysis. In this, the real environment depth information is extracted by the mapping
and the tracking [66]. The Kinect system [67], developed by Microsoft, is one of the widely
used and well-developed approaches in Augmented Reality.
Rambach et al. [ 68] present the idea of augmented things: utilizing off-screen ren-
dering of 3D objects, the realization of application architecture, universal 3D object track-
ing based on the high-quality scans of the objects, and a high degree of parallelization.
Viyanon et al. [ 69] focus on the development of an AR app known as “AR Furniture"
for providing the experience of visualizing the design and decoration to the customers.
The customers ﬁt the pieces of furniture in their rooms and were able to make a deci-
sion regarding their experience. Turkan et al. [70] introduce the new models for teaching
structural analysis which has considerably improved the learning experience. The model
integrates 3D visualization technology with mobile AR. Students can enjoy the different
loading conditions by having the choice of switching loads, and feedback can be provided
in the real-time by AR interface.
3.1.4. Infrared Tracking
The objects that emitted or reﬂected the light are some of the earliest vision-based
tracking techniques used in AR technologies. Their high brightness compared to their
surrounding environment made this tracking very easy [ 71,72]. The self-light emitting
targets were also indifferent to the drastic illumination effects i.e., harsh shadows or poor
ambient lighting. In addition, these targets could either be transﬁxed to the object being
tracked and camera at the exterior of the object and was known as “outside-looking-in” [73].
Or it could be “inside-looking-out”, external in the environment with camera attached to

===== PAGE 10 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 10 of 54
the target [74]. The inside-looking-out conﬁguration, compared to the sensor of the inside-
looking-out system, has greater resolution and higher accuracy of angular orientation. The
inside-looking-out conﬁguration is used in the development of several systems [20,75–77],
typically with infrared LEDs mounted on the ceiling and a head-mounted display with a
camera facing externally.
3.1.5. Model-Based Tracking
The three-dimensional tracking of real-world objects has been the subject of researchers’
interest. It is not as popular as natural feature tracking or planner ﬁducials, however,
a large amount of research has been done on it. In the past, tracking the three-dimensional
model of the object was usually created by the hand. In this system, the lines, cylinders,
spheres, circles, and other primitives were combined to identify the structure of objects [78].
Wuest et al. [79] focus on the development of the scalable and performance pipeline for
creating a tracking solution. The structural information of the scene was extracted by using
the edge ﬁlters. Additionally, for the determination of the pose, edge information and the
primitives were matched [80].
In addition, Gao et al. [ 81] explore the tracking method to identify the different
vertices of a convex polygon. This is done successfully as most of the markers are square.
The coordinates of four vertices are used to determine the transformation matrix of the
camera. Results of the experiment suggested that the algorithm was so robust to withstand
fast motion and large ranges that make the tracking more accurate, stable, and real time.
The combination of edge-based tracking and natural feature tracking has the follow-
ing advantages:
• It provides additional robustness [82].
• Enables spatial tracking and thereby is able to be operated in open environments [83].
• For variable and complex environments, greater robustness was required. Therefore,
they introduced the concept of keyframes [84] in addition to the primitive model [85].
Figen et al. [86] demonstrate of a series of studies that were done at the university
level in which participants were asked to make the mass volume of buildings. The ﬁrst
study demanded the solo work of a designer in which they had to work using two tools:
MTUIs of the AR apps and analog tools. The second study developed the collaboration of
the designers while using analog tools. The study has two goals: change in the behavior of
the designer while using AR apps and affordances of different interfaces.
Developing and updating the real environment’s map simultaneously had been the
subject of interest in model-based tracking. This has a number of developments. First,
simultaneous localization and map building (SLAM) was primarily done for robot naviga-
tion in unknown environments [87]. In augmented reality, [88,89], this technique was used
for tracking the unknown environment in a drift-free manner. Second, parallel mapping
and tracking [88] was developed especially for AR technology. In this, the mapping of
environmental components and the camera tracks were identiﬁed as a separate function. It
improved tracking accuracy and also overall performance. However, like SLAM, it did not
have the capability to close large loops in the constrained environment and area (Figure 6).
Oskiper et al. [90] propose a simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) frame-
work for sensor fusion, indexing, and feature matching in AR apps. It has a paral-
lel mapping engine and error-state extended Kalman ﬁlter (EKF) for these purposes.
Zhang et al.’s [91] Jaguar is a mobile tracking AR application with low latency and ﬂexible
object tracking. This paper discusses the design, execution, and evaluation of Jaguar. Jaguar
enables a markerless tracking feature which is enabled through its client development
on top of ARCoreest from Google. ARCore is also helpful for context awareness while
estimating and recognizing the physical size and object capabilities, respectively.

===== PAGE 11 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 11 of 54
Figure 6. Hybrid tracking: inertial and SLAM combined and used in the latest mobile-based AR tracking.
3.1.6. Global Positioning System—GPS Tracking
This technology refers to the positioning of outdoor tracking with reference to the
earth. The present accuracy of the GPS system is up to 3 m. However, improvements are
available with the advancements in satellite technology and a few other developments.
Real-time kinematic (RTS) is one example of them. It works by using the carrier of a
GPS signal. The major beneﬁt of it is that it has the ability to improve the accuracy
level up to the centimeter level. Feiner’s touring machine [ 92] was the ﬁrst AR system
that utilized GPS in its tracking system. It used the inclinometer/magnetometer and
differential GPS positional tracking. The military, gaming [ 93,94], and the viewership
of historical data [ 95] have applied GPS tracking for the AR experiences. As it only
has the supporting positional tracking low accuracy, it could only be beneﬁcial in the
hybrid tracking systems or in the applications where the pose registration is not important.
AR et al. [96] use the GPS-INS receiver to develop models for object motion having more
precision. Ashutosh et al. [97] explore the hardware challenges of AR technology and
also explore the two main components of hardware technology: battery performance
and global positioning system (GPS). Table 1 provides a succinct categorization of the
prominent tracking technologies in augmented reality. Example studies are referred to
while highlighting the advantages and challenges of each type of tracking technology.
Moreover, possible areas of application are suggested.
3.1.7. Miscellaneous Tracking
Yang et al. [98], in order to recognize the different forms of hatch covers having similar
shapes, propose tracking and cover recognition methods. The results of the experiment
suggest its real-time property and practicability, and tracking accuracy was enough to be
implemented in the AR inspection environment. Kang et al. [99] propose a pupil tracker
which consists of several features that make AR more robust: key point alignment, eye-nose
detection, and infrared (NIR) led. NIR led turns on and off based on the illumination light.
The limitation of this detector is that it cannot be applied in low-light conditions.

===== PAGE 12 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 12 of 54
Table 1. Summary of tracking techniques and their related attributes.
No. Tracking Technology Category of Tracking
Technique
Status of Technique,
Used in Current Devices
Tools/Company Currently Using the
Technology Key Concepts Advantages Challenges Example Application Areas Example Studies
1 Magnetic Marker-less/Sensor based Yes
i. Edge Tracking/Premo etc.
ii. Most HMD/Most Recent Android
Devices
Sensors are placedwithin an
electromagnetic ﬁeld
+360 degree motion
+navigation around the environments
+manipulationof objects
-limited positioning range
-constrained working volume
-highly sensitive to surrounding
environments
Maintenance
Medicine
Manufacturing
[45–53]
2 Inertial Marker-less/Sensor based Yes ARCore/Unity
Motion sensors (e.g., accelerometers
and gyroscopes) are used to determine
the velocity and orientation of objects
+high-bandwidth motion
measurement
+Negligible latency
-drift overtime impacting position
measurement Transport Sports [54]
3 Optical Marker-less/Vision based Yes
i. Unity
ii. Opti Track Used in conguction with
Inertial sensors
+ Optical (Vision Based) sensors
Virtual content is added to real
environments through cameras and
optical sensors.Example approaches
include visible light, 3D structure, and
infrared tracking.
+Popular due to affordable consumer
devices
+Strong tracking algorithms
+Applicationto real-world scenarios
-occlusion when objects are in close
range
Education and Learning
E-commerce Tourism [100,101]
4
Model Based
i. Edge-Based
ii. Template-Based
iii. Depth Imaging
Marker-less/Computer
Vision-based Yes
i. VisionLib
ii. Unity
iii. ViSP
A 3D model is visualized of real
objects
+implicit knowledge of the 3D
structure
+empowersspatial tracking
+robustness is achieved even in
complex environments
-algorithms are required to track and
predict movements
-models need to be created using
dedicated tools and libraries
Manufacturing Construction
Entertainment [78–86]
5 GPS Marker-less/Sensor based Yes
i. ARCore/ARKit
ii. Unity/ARFoundation
iii. Vuforia
GPS sensors are employed to track the
price location of objects in the
environment
+high tracking accuracy (up to cms) -hardware requirements
-objects should be modelled ahead Gaming [102–107]
6 Hybrid Marker-less/Sensor
based/Computer Vision Yes i. ARCore
ii. ARKit
A mix of markerless technologies is
used to overcome the challenges of a
single-tracking technology
+improved tracking range and
accuracy
+higher degree of freedom
+lower drift and jitter
-the need for multiple technologies
(e.g., accelerators, sensors) so cost
issues
Simulation Transport [108–111]
7 SLAM Marker-less/Computer
Vision/Non-Model-based Yes
i. WikiTude
ii. Unity
iii. ARCore
A map is created via a vision of the
real environment to track the virtual
object on it.
Can track unknown environments,
Parallel mapping engine
Does not have the capability to close
large loops in the constrained
environment
Mobile based AR Tracking,
Robot Navigation, [112–114]
8 Structure from Motion
(SFM)
Marker-Less/Computer
Vision/Non-Model-Based Yes i. SLAM
ii. Research Based
3D model reconstruction approach
based on Multi View Stereo
Can be used for estimating the 3D
structure of a scene from a series of 2D
images
Shows limited reconstruction ability
in vegetated environments
3-D scanning , augmented
reality, and visual simultaneous
localization and mapping
(vSLAM)
[90]
9 Fiducial/Landmark Marker-based /Fiducial Yes i. Solar/Unity
ii. Uniducial/Unity
Tracking is made with reference to
artiﬁcial landmarks (i.e., markers)
added to the AR environment
+better accuracy is achieved
+stable tracking with less cost
-the need for landmarks
-requires image recognition (i.e.,
camera)
-less ﬂexible compared to
marker-based
Marketing [115–117]
10 QR Code based Tracking Marker-Based/Tag-Based Yes Microsoft Hololense/Immersive
Headsets/Unity Tracking is made +better accuracyis achieved
+stable tracking with less cost
QR codes pose signiﬁcant security
risks. Supply Chain Management [115]

===== PAGE 13 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 13 of 54
Moreover, Bach et al. [118] introduce an AR canvas for information visualization which
is quite different from the traditional AR canvas. Therefore, dimensions and essential
aspects for developing the visualization design for AR-canvas while enlisting the several
limitations within the process. Zeng et al. [119] discuss the design and the implementation
of FunPianoAR for creating a better AR piano learning experience. However, a number of
discrepancies occurred with this system, and the initiation of a hybrid system is a more
viable option. Rewkowski et al. [120] introduce a prototype system of AR to visualize the
laparoscopic training task. This system is capable of tracking small objects and requires
surgery training by using widely compatible and inexpensive borescopes.
3.1.8. Hybrid Tracking
Hybrid tracking systems were used to improve the following aspects of the tracking
systems:
• Improving the accuracy of the tracking system.
• Coping with the weaknesses of the respective tracking methods.
• Adding more degrees of freedom.
Gorovyi et al. [ 108] detail the basic principles that make up an AR by proposing a hy-
brid visual tracking algorithm. The direct tracking techniques are incorporated with the
optical ﬂow technique to achieve precise and stable results. The results suggested that
they both can be incorporated to make a hybrid system, and ensured its success in de-
vices having limited hardware capabilities. Previously, magnetic tracking [109] or inertial
trackers [110] were used in the tracking applications while using the vision-based tracking
system. Isham et al. [111] use a game controller and hybrid tracking to identify and resolve
the ultrasound image position in a 3D AR environment. This hybrid system was beneﬁcial
because of the following reasons:
• Low drift of vision-based tracking.
• Low jitter of vision-based tracking.
• They had a robust sensor with high update rates. These characteristics decreased
the invalid pose computation and ensured the responsiveness of the graphical up-
dates [121].
• They had more developed inertial and magnetic trackers which were capable of
extending the range of tracking and did not require the line of sight. The above-
mentioned beneﬁts suggest that the utilization of the hybrid system is more beneﬁcial
than just using the inertial trackers.
In addition, Mao et al. [122] propose a new tracking system with a number of unique
features. First, it accurately translates the relative distance into the absolute distance by
locating the reference points at the new positions. Secondly, it embraces the separate
receiver and sender. Thirdly, resolves the discrepancy in the sampling frequency between
the sender and receiver. Finally, the frequency shift due to movement is highly considered
in this system. Moreover, the combination of the IMU sensor and Doppler shift with the
distributed frequency modulated continuous waveform (FMCW) helps in the continuous
tracking of mobile due to multiple time interval developments. The evaluation of the
system suggested that it can be applied to the existing hardware and has an accuracy to the
millimeter level.
The GPS tracking system alone only provides the positional information and has low
accuracy. So, GPS tracking systems are usually combined with vision-based tracking or
inertial sensors. The intervention would help gain the full pose estimation of 6DoF [123].
Moreover, backup tracking systems have been developed as an alternative when the
GPS fails [98,124]. The optical tracking systems [100] or the ultrasonic rangeﬁnders [101]
can be coupled with the inertial trackers for enhancing efﬁciency. As the differential
measurement approach causes the problem of drift, these hybrid systems help resolve them.
Furthermore, the use of gravity as a reference to the inertial sensor made them static and
bound. The introduction of the hybrid system would make them operate in a simulator,

===== PAGE 14 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 14 of 54
vehicle, or in any other moving platform [125]. The introduction of accelerators, cameras,
gyroscopes [126], global positioning systems [127], and wireless networking [128] in mobile
phones such as tablets and smartphones also gives an opportunity for hybrid tracking.
Furthermore, these devices have the capability of determining outdoor as well as indoor
accurate poses [129].
3.2. Marker-Based T racking
Fiducial Tracking: Artiﬁcial landmarks for aiding the tracking and registration that
are added to the environment are known as ﬁducial. The complexity of ﬁducial tracking
varies signiﬁcantly depending upon the technology and the application used. Pieces of
paper or small colored LEDs were used typically in the early systems, which had the
ability to be detected using color matching and could be added to the environment [130].
If the position of ﬁducials is well-known and they are detected enough in the scene then
the pose of the camera can be determined. The positioning of one ﬁducial on the basis
of a well-known previous position and the introduction of additional ﬁducials gives an
additional beneﬁt that workplaces could dynamically extend [ 131]. A QR code-based
fudicial/marker is also proposed by some researchers for marker-/tag-based tracking [115].
With the progression of work on the concept and complexity of the ﬁducials, additional
features such as multi-rings were introduced for the detection of ﬁducials at much larger
distances [116]. A minimum of four points of a known position is needed for determining
for calculating the pose of the viewer [117]. In order to make sure that the four points are
visible, the use of these simpler ﬁducials demanded more care and effort for placing them
in the environment. Examples of such ﬁducials are ARToolkit and its successors, whose
registration techniques are mostly planar ﬁducial. In the upcoming section, AR display
technologies are discussed to fulﬁll all the conditions of Azuma’s deﬁnition.
3.3. Summary
This section provides comprehensive details on tracking technologies that are broadly
classiﬁed into markerless and marker-based approaches. Both types have many subtypes
whose details, applications, pros, and cons are provided in a detailed fashion. The different
categories of tracking technologies are presented in Figure 4, while the summary of tracking
technologies is provided in Figure 7. Among the different tracking technologies, hybrid
tracking technologies are the most adaptive. This study combined SLAM and inertial
tracking technologies as part of the framework presented in the paper.
Figure 7. Steps for combining real and virtual content.

===== PAGE 15 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 15 of 54
4. Augmented Reality Display Technology
For the combination of a real and the virtual world in such a way that they both look
superimposed on each other, as in Azuma’s deﬁnition, some technology is necessarily
required to display them.
4.1. Combination of Real and the Virtual Images
Methods or procedures required for the merging of the virtual content in the physical
world include camera calibration, tracking, registration, and composition as depicted in
Figure 7.
4.2. Camera vs. Optical See Through Calibration
It is a procedure or an optical model in which the eye display geometry or param-
eters deﬁne the user’s view. Or, in other words, it is a technique of complementing the
dimensions and parameters of the physical and the virtual camera.
In AR, calibration can be used in two ways, one is camera calibration, and another is
optical calibration. The camera calibration technique is used in video see-through (VST)
displays. However, optical calibration is used in optical see-through (OST) displays. OST
calibration can be further divided into three umbrellas of techniques. Initially, manual
calibration techniques were used in OST. Secondly, semi-automatic calibration techniques
were used, and thirdly, we have now automatic calibration techniques. Manual calibration
requires a human operator to perform the calibration tasks. Semi-automatic calibration,
such as simple SPAAM and display relative calibration (DRC), partially collect some pa-
rameters automatically, which usually needed to be done manually in earlier times by
the user. Thirdly, the automatic OST calibration was proposed by Itoh et al. in 2014 with
the model of interaction-free display calibration technique (INDICA) [132]. In video see
through (VST), computer vision techniques such as cameras are used for the registration
of real environments. However, in optical see through (OST), VST calibration techniques
cannot be used as it is more complex because cameras are replaced by human eyes. Vari-
ous calibration techniques were developed for OST. The author evaluates the registration
accuracy of the automatic OST head-mounted display (HMD) calibration technique called
recycled INDICA presented by Itoh and Klinker. In addition, two more calibration tech-
niques called the single-point active alignment method (SPAAM) and degraded SPAAM
were also evaluated. Multiple users were asked to perform two separate tasks to check
the registration and the calibration accuracy of all three techniques can be thoroughly
studied. Results show that the registration method of the recycled INDICA technique is
more accurate in the vertical direction and showed the distance of virtual objects accurately.
However, in the horizontal direction, the distance of virtual objects seemed closer than
intended [133]. Furthermore, the results show that recycled INDICA is more accurate
than any other common technique. In addition, this technique is also more accurate than
the SPAAM technique. Although, different calibration techniques are used for OST and
VST displays, as discussed in [133], they do not provide all the depth cues, which leads
to interaction problems. Moreover, different HMDs have different tracking systems. Due
to this, they are all calibrated with an external independent measuring system. In this
regard, Ballestin et al. propose a registration framework for developing AR environments
where all the real objects, including users, and virtual objects are registered in a common
frame. The author also discusses the performance of both displays during interaction tasks.
Different simple and complex tasks such as 3D blind reaching are performed using OST and
VST HMDs to test their registration process and interaction of the users with both virtual
and real environments. It helps to compare the two technologies. The results show that
these technologies have issues, however, they can be used to perform different tasks [134].
Non-Geometric Calibration Method
Furthermore, these geometric calibrations lead to perceptual errors while converting
from 3D to 2D [135]. To counter this problem, parallax-free video see-through HMDs were

===== PAGE 16 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 16 of 54
proposed; however, they were very difﬁcult to create. In this regard, Cattari et al. in 2019
proposes a non-stereoscopic video see-through HMD for a close-up view. It mitigates
perceptual errors by mitigating geometric calibration. Moreover, the authors also identify
the problems of non-stereoscopic VST HMD. The aim is to propose a system that provides
a view consistent with the real world [136,137]. Moreover, State et al. [138] focus on a VST
HMD system that generates zero eye camera offset. While Bottechia et al. [139] present an
orthoscope monocular VST HMD prototype.
4.3. T racking T echnologies
Some sort of technology is required to track the position and orientation of the object
of interest which could either be a physical object or captured by a camera with reference
to the coordinate plan (3D or 2D) of a tracking system. Several technologies ranging from
computer vision techniques to 6DoF sensors are used for tracking the physical scenes.
4.4. Registration
Registration is deﬁned as a process in which the coordinate frame used for manifesting
the virtual content is complemented by the coordinate frame of the real-world scene. This
would help in the accurate alignment of the virtual content and the physical scene.
4.5. Composition
Now, the accuracy of two important steps, i.e., the accurate calibration of the virtual
camera and the correct registration of the virtual content relative to the physical world,
signiﬁes the right correspondence between the physical environment and the virtual scene
which is generated on the basis of tracking updates. This process then leads to the composi-
tion of the virtual scene’s image and can be done in two ways: Optically (or physically)
or digitally. The physical or digital composition depends upon the conﬁguration and
dimensions of the system used in the augmented reality system.
4.6. Types of Augmented Reality Displays
The combination of virtual content in the real environment divides the AR displays
into four major types, as depicted in Figure 8. All have the same job to show the merged
image of real and virtual content to the user’s eye. The authors have categorized the latest
technologies of optical display after the advancements in holographic optical elements
HOEs. There are other categories of AR display that arealso used, such as video-based, eye
multiplexed, and projection onto a physical surface.
Figure 8. Types of augmented reality display technologies.

===== PAGE 17 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 17 of 54
4.7. Optical See-Through AR Display
These kinds of displays use the optical system to merge the real scenes and virtual
scene images. Examples of AR displays are head-up display HUD systems of advanced
cars and cockpits of airplanes. These systems consist of the following components: beam
splitters, which can be of two forms, combined prisms or half mirrors. Most beam splitters
reﬂect the image from the video display. This reﬂected image is then integrated with a
real-world view that can be visualized from the splitter. For half mirrors as a beam splitter,
the working way is somewhat different: the real-world view is reﬂected on the mirror rather
than the image of the video display. At the same time, the video display can also be viewed
from the mirror. The transport projection system is semi-transparent optical technology
used in optical display systems. Their semi-transparent property allows the viewer to
witness the view at the back of the screen. Additionally, this system uses diffused light to
manifest the exhibited image. Examples of semi-display optical systems are transparent
projection ﬁlm, transparent LCDs, etc. Optical combiners are used for the combination of
virtual and real scene images. Optical see-through basically has two sub-categories, one
is a free-space combiner and the other is a wave-guide combiner [140]. Additionally, now
the advancement of technology has enabled technicians to make self-transparent displays.
This self-transparent feature help in the miniaturization and simpliﬁcation of the size and
structure of the optical see-through displays.
4.7.1. Free-Space Combiners
Papers related to free space combiners are discussed here. Pulli et al. [11] introduce a
second-generation immersive optical see-through AR system known as meta 2. It is based
on an optical engine that uses the free-form visor to make a more immersive experience.
Another traditional geometric display is ultra-fast high-resolution piezo linear actuators
combined with Alvarez’s lens to make a new varifocal optical see-through HMD. It uses a
beamsplitter which acts as an optical combiner to merge the light paths of the real and virtual
worlds [12]. Another type of free-space combiner is Maxwellian-type [112–114,141]. In [142],
the author employs the random structure as a spatial light modulator for developing a light-
ﬁeld near-eye display based on random pinholes. The latest work in [143,144] introduces
an Ini-based light ﬁeld display using the multi-focal micro-lens to propose the extended
depth of the ﬁeld. To enhance the eyebox view there is another technique called puppil
duplication steering[145–150]. In this regard, refs. [102,151] present the eyebox-expansion
method for the holographic near-eye display and pupil-shifting holographic optical element
(PSHOE) for the implementation. Additionally, the design architecture is discussed and the
incorporation of the holographic optical element within the holographic display system
is discussed. There is another recent technique similar to the Maxwellian view called
pin-light systems. It increases the Maxwellian view with larger DoFs [103,104].
4.7.2. Wave-Guide Combiner
The waveguide combiner basically traps light into TIR as opposed to free-space, which
lets the light propagate without restriction [104–106]. The waveguide combiner has two
types, one is diffractive waveguides and another is achromatic waveguides [107,152–155].
4.8. Video-Based AR Displays
These displays execute the digital processes as their working principle [ 156]. To
rephrase, the merging of the physical world video and the virtual images, in video display
systems, is carried out by digital processing. The working of the video-based system de-
pends upon the video camera system by which it fabricates the real-world video into digital.
The rationale behind this system is that the composition of the physical world’s video or
scenario with the virtual content could be manifested digitally through the operation of
a digital image processing technique [ 157]. Mostly, whenever the user has to watch the
display, they have to look in the direction of the video display, and the camera is usually
attached at the back of this display. So, the camera faces the physical world scene. These are

===== PAGE 18 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 18 of 54
known as “video see-through displays" because in them the real world is fabricated through
the digitization (i.e., designing the digital illusion) of these video displays. Sometimes
the design of the camera is done in such a way that it may show an upside-down image of
an object, create the illusion of a virtual mirror, or site the image at a distant place.
4.9. Projection-Based AR Display
Real models [158] and walls [159] could be example of projection-based AR displays.
All the other kinds of displays use the display image plan for the combination of the real
and the virtual image. However, this display directly overlays the virtual scene image over
the physical object. They work in the following manner:
• First, they track the user’s viewpoint.
• Secondly, they track the physical object.
• Then, they impart the interactive augmentation [160].
Mostly, these displays have a projector attached to the wall or a ceiling. This inter-
vention has an advantage as well as a disadvantage. The advantage is that this does not
demand the user to wear something. The disadvantage is that it is static and restricts the
display to only one location of projection. For resolving this problem and making the pro-
jectors mobile, a small-sized projector has been made that could be easily carried from one
place to another [161]. More recently, with the advancement of technology, miniaturized
projectors have also been developed. These could be held in the hand [162] or worn on the
chest [163] or head [164].
4.10. Eye-Multiplexed Augmented Reality Display
In eye-multiplexed AR displays, the users are allowed to combine the views of the
virtual and real scenes mentally in their minds [72]. Rephrased, these displays do not com-
bine the image digitally; therefore, it requires less computational power [72]. The process
is as follows. First, the virtual image gets registered to the physical environment. Second,
the user will get to see the same rendered image as the physical scene because the virtual
image is registered to the physical environment. The user has to mentally conﬁgure the
images in their mind to combine the virtual and real scene images because the display does
not composite the rendered and the physical image. For two reasons, the display should be
kept near the viewer’s eye: ﬁrst, the display could appear as an inset into the real world,
and second, the user would have to put less effort into mentally compositing the image.
The division of the displays on the basis of the position of the display between the real
and virtual scenes is referred to as the “eye to world spectrum”.
4.11. Head-Attached Display
Head-attached displays are in the form of glasses, helmets, or goggles. They vary
in size from smaller to bigger. However, with the advancement of technology, they are
becoming lighter to wear. They work by displaying the virtual image right in front of the
user’s eye. As a result, no other physical object can come between the virtual scene and
the viewer’s eye. Therefore, the third physical object cannot occlude them. In this regard,
Koulieris et al. [165] summarized the work on immersive near-eye tracking technologies and
displays. Results suggest various loopholes within the work on display technologies: user
and environmental tracking and emergence–accommodation conﬂict. Moreover, it suggests
that advancement in the optics technology and focus adjustable lens will improve future
headset innovations and creation of a much more comfortable HMD experience. In addition
to it, Minoufekr et al. [166] illustrate and examine the veriﬁcation of CNC machining using
Microsoft HoloLens. In addition, they also explore the performance of AR with machine
simulation. Remote computers can easily pick up the machine models and load them onto
the HoloLens as holograms. A simulation framework is employed that makes the ma-
chining process observed prior to the original process. Further, Franz et al. [88] introduce
two sharing techniques i.e., over-the-shoulder AR and semantic linking for investigating
the scenarios in which not every user is wearing HWD. Semantic linking portrays the

===== PAGE 19 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 19 of 54
virtual content’s contextual information on some large display. The result of the experiment
suggested that semantic linking and over-the-shoulder suggested communication between
participants as compared to the baseline condition. Condino et al. [167] aim to explore
two main aspects. First, to explore complex craniotomies to gauge the reliability of the
AR-headsets [168]. Secondly, for non-invasive, fast, and completely automatic planning-to-
patient registration, this paper determines the efﬁcacy of patient-speciﬁc template-based
methodology for this purpose.
4.12. Head-Mounted Displays
The most commonly used displays in AR research are head-mounted displays (HMDs).
They are also known as face-mounted displays or near-eye displays. The user puts them
on, and the display is represented right in front of their eyes. They are most commonly
in the form of goggles. While using HMDs, optical and video see-through conﬁgurations
are most commonly used. However, recently, head-mounted projectors are also explored
to make them small enough to wear. Examples of smart glasses, Recon Jet, Google glass,
etc., are still under investigation for their usage in head-mounted displays. Barz et al. [169]
introduce a real-time AR system that augments the information obtained from the recently
attended objects. This system is implemented by using head-mounted displays from the
state-of-the-art Microsoft HoloLens [170]. This technology can be very helpful in the ﬁelds
of education, medicine, and healthcare. Fedosov et al. [171] introduce a skill system, and an
outdoor ﬁeld study was conducted on the 12 snowboards and skiers. First, it develops a
system that has a new technique to review and share personal content. Reuter et al. [172]
introduce the coordinative concept, namely RescueGlass, for German Red Cross rescue dog
units. This is made up of a corresponding smartphone app and a hands-free HMD (head-
mounted display) [173]. This is evaluated to determine the ﬁeld of emergency response
and management. The initial design is presented for collaborative professional mobile
tasks and is provided using smart glasses. However, the evaluation suggested a number
of technical limitations in the research that could be covered in future investigations.
Tobias et al. [174] explore the aspects such as ambiguity, depth cues, performed tasks, user
interface, and perception for 2D and 3D visualization with the help of examples. Secondly,
they categorize the head-mounted displays, introduce new concepts for collaboration tasks,
and explain the concepts of big data visualization. The results of the study suggested that
the use of collaboration and workspace decisions could be improved with the introduction
of the AR workspace prototype. In addition, these displays have lenses that come between
the virtual view and the user’s eye just like microscopes and telescopes. So, the experiments
are under investigation to develop a more direct way of viewing images such as the
virtual retinal display developed in 1995 [175]. Andersson et al. [176] show that training,
maintenance, process monitoring, and programming can be improved by integrating AR
with human—robot interaction scenarios.
4.13. Body-Attached and Handheld Displays
Previously, the experimentation with handheld display devices was done by tethering
the small LSDs to the computers [177,178]. However, advancements in technology have im-
proved handheld devices in many ways. Most importantly, they have become so powerful
to operate AR visuals. Many of them are now used in AR displays such as personal digital
assistants [179], cell phones [180], tablet computers [181], and ultra-mobile PCs [182].
4.13.1. Smartphones and Computer tablets
In today’s world, computer tablets and smartphones are powerful enough to run AR
applications, because of the following properties: various sensors, cameras, and powerful
graphic processors. For instance, Google Project Tango and ARCore have the most depth
imaging sensors to carry out the AR experiences. Chan et al. [183] discuss the challenges
faced while applying and investigating methodologies to enhance direct touch interaction
on intangible displays. Jang et al. [ 184] aim to explore e-leisure due to enhancement in

===== PAGE 20 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 20 of 54
the use of mobile AR in outdoor environments. This paper uses three methods, namely
markerless, marker-based, and sensorless to investigate the tracking of the human body.
Results suggested that markerless tracking cannot be used to support the e-leisure on
mobile AR. With the advancement of electronic computers, OLED panels and transparent
LCDs have been developed. It is also said that in the future, building handheld optical
see-through devices would be available. Moreover, Fang et al. [ 185] focus on two main
aspects of mobile AR. First, a combination of the inertial sensor, 6DoF motion tracking
based on sensor-fusion, and monocular camera for the realization of mobile AR in real-
time. Secondly, to balance the latency and jitter phenomenon, an adaptive ﬁlter design
is introduced. Furthermore, Irshad et al. [186] introduce an evaluation method to assess
mobile AR apps. Additionally, Loizeau et al. [187] explore a way of implementing AR for
maintenance workers in industrial settings.
4.13.2. Micro Projectors
Micro projectors are an example of a mobile phone-based AR display. Researchers are
trying to investigate these devices that could be worn on the chest [ 188], shoulder [189],
or wrist [190]. However, mostly they are handheld and look almost like handheld ﬂash-
lights [191].
4.13.3. Spatial Displays
Spatial displays are used to exhibit a larger display. Henceforth, these are used in
the location where more users could get beneﬁt from them i.e., public displays. Moreover,
these displays are static, i.e., they are ﬁxed at certain positions and can not be mobilized.
The common examples of spatial displays include those that create optical see-through
displays through the use of optical beamers: half mirror workbench [192–195] and virtual
showcases. Half mirrors are commonly used for the merging of haptic interfaces. They also
enable closer virtual interaction. Virtual showcases may exhibit the virtual images on some
solid or physical objects mentioned in [196–200]. Moreover, these could be combined with
the other type of technologies to excavate further experiences. The use of volumetric 3D
displays [201], autostereoscopic displays [202], and other three-dimensional displays could
be researched to investigate further interesting ﬁndings.
4.13.4. Sensory Displays
In addition to visual displays, there are some sensors developed that work with
other types of sensory information such as haptic or audio sensors. Audio augmentation
is easier than video augmentation because the real world and the virtual sounds get
naturally mixed up with each other. However, the most challenging part is to make the
user think that the virtual sound is spatial. Multi-channel speaker systems and the use of
stereo headphones with the head-related transfer function (HRTF) are being researched
to cope with this challenge [203]. Digital sound projectors use the reverberation and the
interference of sound by using a series of speakers [204]. Mic-throughand hear-through
systems, developed by Lindeman [ 205,206,206], work effectively and are analogous to
video and optical see-through displays. The feasibility test for this system was done
by using a bone conduction headset. Other sensory experiences are also being researched.
For example, the augmentation of the gustatory and olfactory senses. Olfactory and visual
augmentation of a cookie-eating scene was developed by Narumi [207]. Table 2 gives the
primary types of augmented reality display technologies and discusses their advantages
and disadvantages.

===== PAGE 21 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 21 of 54
Table 2. A Summary of Augmented Reality Display Technologies.
No. Type Technology Is Still
Used or Obselete?
Technology Used in De-
vices/Software/Company How Does It Work? Advantages Challenges Practical Use Areas Example Studies
1 Optical
See-through Yes
i. Microsoft’s Hololens
ii. Magic Leap One
iii. Google Glass
Merges virtual and real scenes
using optical systems through
which users can see
+the real world can be viewed
+achieves immersive
augmented reality experiences
-system lags and calibration
issues
-reﬂections and limited ﬁeld of
view
-occlusion may be challenging
to achieve
Medicine Tourism
Education [11,102,112–114,140–151]
2 Video
See-through Yes
i. HTC Vive Headset
ii. Handheld Devices
with AR Library, such as,
ARCore, ARKit
Combines a digital video of the
physical world with virtual
content using image processing
+enables a wide ﬁeld of view
+leveraging brightness of
objects
-weak peripheral vision of the
visuals
-lags due to video rendering
-disorientation
Advertisement Tourism [156,157]
3 Projection based Yes Tile Five
Projects the virtual scene on a
physical object (i.e., Wall or
Ceiling) using a projector
+the user does not need to wear
any equipment
-The projection is static
-Projections are restricted to
only one location
Entertainment [158–164]
4 Eye multiplexed Yes Real Wear HMT-1
Integrates real scenes and
virtual content in the mind of
users
+requires less computational
power
-Display must be close to the
viewer’s eyes [72]
5 Head attached Yes SketchUp
Displays virtual images in front
of the users’ eyes using
dedicatedequipment (e.g.,
helmets and glasses)
+does not block users’ vision
+enables user immersion and
engagement
-Intrusive to wear
-user and environment tracking
could be challenging
Architecture Training [88,165–168]
6 Head mounted Yes
i. Avionic Displays
ii. Solos
iii. Beyeonics
Shows AR experiences in front
of the users’ eyes using HMDs
+VR world is compact in the
smallest physical space
+enables higher user focus on
interaction with AR
-Must be worn, which could be
disturbing
-Lenses may impact the user
experience
Education Medicine
Healthcare [208–213]
7 Body attached
and handheld Yes Android iOS Depicts AR visuals on regular
handheld devices
+availability of affordable
devices and apps
+ubiquitous devices (e.g.
smartphones)
+ability to work with haptic and
audio sensors
-interaction on tangible devices
poses difﬁculty
-visibility of handheld devices
(e.g., brightness and contract)
Leisure [177–182]

===== PAGE 22 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 22 of 54
4.14. Summary
This section presented a comprehensive survey of AR display technologies. These
displays not only focused on combing the virtual and real-world scenes of visual experience
but also other ways of combining the sensory, olfactory, and gustatory senses are also under
examination by researchers. Previously, head-mounted displays were most commonly
in practice; however, now handheld devices and tablets or mobile-based experiences are
widely used. These things may also change in the future depending on future research and
low cost. The role of display technologies was elaborated ﬁrst, thereafter, the process of
combining the real and augmented contents and visualizing these to users was elaborated.
The section elaborated thoroughly on where the optical see-through and video-based
see-through are utilized along with details of devices. Video see-through (VST) is used
in head-mounted displays and computer vision techniques such as cameras are used
for registration of real environment, while in optical see-through (OST), VST calibration
techniques cannot be used due to complexity, and cameras are replaced by human eyes.
The optical see-through is a trendy approach as of now. The different calibration approaches
are presented and analyzed and it is identiﬁed after analysis, the results show that recycled
INDICA is more accurate than other common techniques presented in the paper. This
section also presents video-based AR displays. Figure 8 present a classiﬁed representation
of different display technologies pertaining to video-based, head-mounted, and sensory-
based approaches. The functions and applications of various display technologies are
provided in Table 2 Each of the display technologies presented has its applicability in
various realms whose details are summarized in the same Table 2.
5. Walking and Distance Estimation in AR
The effectiveness of AR technologies depends on the perception of distance of users
from both real and virtual objects [214,215]. Mikko et al. performed some experiments to
judge depth using stereoscopic depth perception [216]. The perception can be changed if
the objects are on the ground or off the ground. In this regard, Carlos et al. also proposed a
comparison between the perception of distance of these objects on the ground and off the
ground. The experiment was done where the participant perceived the distance from cubes
on the ground and off the ground as well. The results showed that there is a difference
between both perceptions. However, it was also shown that this perception depends on
whether the vision is monocular or binocular [217]. Plenty of research has been done in
outdoor navigation and indoor navigation areas with AR [214]. In this regard, Umair et al.
present an indoor navigation system in which Google glass is used as a wearable head-
mounted display. A pre-scanned 3D map is used to track an indoor environment. This
navigation system is tested on both HMD and handheld devices such as smartphones.
The results show that the HMD was more accurate than the handheld devices. Moreover, it
is stated that the system needs more improvement [218].
6. AR Development Tool
In addition to the tracking and display devices, there are some other software tools
required for creating an AR experience. As these are hardware devices, they require some
software to create an AR experience. This section explores the tools and the software
libraries. It will cover both the aspects of the commercially available tools and some that
are research related. Different software applications require a separate AR development
tool. A complete set of low-level software libraries, plug-ins, platforms, and standalones
are presented in Figure 9 so they can be summarized for the reader.

===== PAGE 23 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 23 of 54
Figure 9. Stack of development libraries, plug-ins, platforms, and standalone authoring tools for
augmented reality development.
In some tools, computer vision-based tracking (see Section 3.1.2) is preferred for creat-
ing an indoor experience, while others utilized sensors for creating an outdoor experience.
The use of each tool would depend upon the type of platform (web or mobile) for which it
is designed. Further in the document, the available AR tools are discussed, which consist
of both novel tools and those that are widely known. Broadly, the following tools will
be discussed:
• Low-level software development tools: needs high technological and programming
skills.
• Rapid prototyping: provides a quick experience.
• Plug-ins that run on the existing applications.
• Standalone tools that are speciﬁcally designed for non-programmers.
• Next generation of AR developing tools.
6.1. Low-Level Software Libraries and Frameworks
Low-level software and frameworks make the functions of display and core tracking
accessible for creating an AR experience. One of the most commonly used AR software
libraries, as discussed in the previous section, is ARToolKit. ARToolKit is developed by
Billing Hurst and Kato that has two versions [ 219]. It works on the principle of a ﬁdu-
cial marker-based registration system [220]. There are certain advances in the ARToolKit
discussed related to the tracking in [213,221–224]. The ﬁrst one is an open-source version
that provides the marker-based tracking experience, while the second one provides natu-
ral tracking features and is a commercial version. It can be operated on Linux, Windows,
and Mac OS desktops as it is written in the C language. It does not require complex graphics
or built-in support for accomplishing its major function of providing a tracking experience,
and it can operate simply by using low-level OpenGL-based rendering. ARToolKit requires
some additional libraries such as osgART and OpenScene graph library so it can provide
a complete AR experience to AR applications. OpenScene graph library is written in C

===== PAGE 24 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 24 of 54
language and operates as an open-source graph library. For graphic rendering, the Open-
Scene graph uses OpenGL. Similarly, the osgART library links the OpenScene graph and
ARToolKit. It has advanced rendering techniques that help in developing the interacting AR
application. OsgART library has a modular structure and can work with any other tracking
library such as PTAM and BazAR, if ARtoolkit is not appropriate. BazAR is a workable
tracking and geometric calibration library. Similarly, PTAM is a SLAM-based tracking
library. It has a research-based and commercial license. All these libraries are available and
workable to create a workable AR application. Goblin XNA [208] is another platform that
has the components of interactions based on physics, video capture, a head-mounted AR
display on which output is displayed, and a three-dimensional user interface. With Goblin
XNA, existing XNA games could be easily modiﬁed [209]. Goblin XNA is available as a
research and educational platform. Studierstube [210] is another AR system through which
a complete AR application can be easily developed. It has tracking hardware, input devices,
different types of displays, AR HMD, and desktops. Studierstube was specially developed
to subsidize the collaborative applications [211,212]. Studierstube is a research-oriented
library and is not available as commercial and workable easy-to-use software. Another
commercially available SDK is Metaio SDK [225]. It consists of a variety of AR tracking
technologies including image tracking, marker tracking, face tracking, external infrared
tracking, and a three-dimensional object tracking. However, in May 2015, it was acquired by
Apple and Metaio products and subscriptions are no longer available for purchase. Some of
these libraries such as Studierstube and ARToolKit were initially not developed for PDAs.
However, they have been re-developed for PDAs [226]. It added a few libraries in assistance
such as open tracker, pocketknife for hardware abstraction, KLIMT as mobile rendering,
and the formal libraries of communication (ACE) and screen graphs. All these libraries
helped to develop a complete mobile-based AR collaborative experience [227,228]. Simi-
larly, ARToolKit also incorporated the OpenScene graph library to provide a mobile-based
AR experience. It worked with Android and iOS with a native development kit including
some Java wrapping classes. Vuforia’s Qualcomm low-level library also provided an AR
experience for mobile devices. ARToolKit and Vuforia both can be installed as a plug-in in
Unity which provides an easy-to-use application development for various platforms. There
are a number of sensors and low-level vision and location-based libraries such as Metaio
SDK and Droid which were developed for outdoor AR experience. In addition to these
low-level libraries, the Hit Lab NZ Outdoor AR library provided high-level abstraction for
outdoor AR experience [229]. Furthermore, there is a famous mobile-based location AR
tool that is called Hoppala-Augmentation. The geotags given by this tool can be browsed
by any of the AR browsers including Layar, Junaio, and Wikitude [230].
6.2. ART ag
ARTag is designed to resolve the limitations of ARToolkit. This system was developed
to resolve a number of issues:
• Resolving inaccurate pattern matching by preventing the false positive matches.
• Enhancing the functioning in the presence of the imbalanced lightening conditions.
• Making the occlusion more invariant.
However, ARTag is no longer actively under development and supported by the NRC
Lab. A commercial license is not available.
6.3. Wikitude Studio
This is also a web-based authoring tool for creating mobile-based AR applications. It
allows the utilization of computer vision-based technology for the registration of the real
world. Several types of media such as animation and 3D models can be used for creating
an AR scene. One of the important features of Wikitude is that the developed mobile AR
content can be uploaded not only on the Wikitude AR browser app but also on a custom
mobile app [231]. Wikitude’s commercial plug-in is also available in Unity to enhance the
AR experience for developers.

===== PAGE 25 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 25 of 54
6.4. Standalone AR T ools
Standalone AR tools are mainly designed to enable non-programmer users to create an
AR experience. A person the basic computer knowledge can build and use them. The reason
lies in the fact that most AR authoring tools are developed on a graphical user interface. It is
known as a standalone because it does not require any additional software for its operation.
The most common and major functions of standalone are animation, adding interactive
behaviors, and construction. The earliest examples of the standalone tools are AMIRE [232]
and CATOMIR [233]. However, AMIRE and CATOMIR have no support available and are
not maintained by the development team.
BuildAR
This standalone AR authoring tool has the advantage of quickly adding to the devel-
opment of the AR experience. BuildAR has important characteristics. This allows the user
to add video, 3D models, sound, text, and images. It has both arbitrary images and the
square marker for which it provides computer vision-based tracking. They use the format
of proprietary ﬁle format for saving the content developed by the user. BuildAR viewer
software can be downloaded for free and it helps in viewing the ﬁle. However, BuildAR
has no support available and the exe ﬁle is not available on their website.
Limitation: It does not support adding new interactive features. However,Choi et al. [234]
have provided a solution to this constraint. They have added the desktop authoring tool
that helps in adding new interactive experiences.
6.5. Rapid Prototyping/Development T ools
In order to cope with the limitation of low-level libraries, another more fast and more
rapid AR application development tool is required. The major idea behind the development
of rapid prototyping was that it rapidly shows the user the prototype before executing
the hard exercise of developing the application. In the following paragraphs, a number
of different tools are explained for developing rapid prototyping. For the creation of
multimedia content, Adobe Flashis one of the most famous tools. It was developed on
desktop and web platforms. Moreover, the web desktop and mobile experiences can be
prototyped by it. Flash developers can use the FLARManager, FLARToolKit, or any other
plug-ins for the development of AR experience. Porting the version of ARToolKit over the
ﬂash on the web creates the AR experience. Its process is so fast that just by writing a few
lines, the developer can:
• Activate their camera.
• The AR markers could be viewed in a camera.
• The virtual content could be overlaid and loaded on the tracked image.
FLARToolkit is the best platform for creating AR prototyping because it has made
it very easy for being operated by anyone. Anyone who has a camera and ﬂash-enabled
web browser can easily develop the AR experience. Alternatives to Flash: According to the
website of Adobe, it no longer supports Flash Player after 31 December 2020 and blocked
Flash content from running in Flash Player beginning 12 January 2021. Adobe strongly
recommends all users immediately uninstall Flash Player to help protect their systems.
However, some AR plug-ins could be used as an alternative to Flash-based AR applications.
For instance, Microsoft Silverlight has the SLARToolKit. HTML5 is also recently used by
researchers for creating web-based AR experiences. The major beneﬁt of using HTML5 is
that the interference of the third-party plug-in is not required. For instance, the AR natural
feature tracking is implemented on WebGL, HTML5, and JavaScript. This was developed
by Oberhofer and was viewable on mobile web browsers and desktops. Additionally,
the normal HTML, with few web component technologies, has been used by Ahn [235] to
develop a complete mobile AR framework.

===== PAGE 26 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 26 of 54
6.6. Plug-ins to Existing Developer T ools
For the creation of AR experiences, the software libraries require tremendous program-
ming techniques. So, plug-ins could be used as an alternative. Plug-ins are devices that
could be plugged into the existing software packages. The AR functionality is added to
the software packages that to the existing two-dimensional or three-dimensional content
authoring tools. If the user already knows the procedure of using authoring tools that are
supported by plug-ins, then AR plug-ins for the non-AR authoring tools are useful. These
tools are aimed at:
• AR tracking and visualization functions for the existing authoring tools.
• It depends on the content authoring function supplied by the main authoring tool.
There are certain tools available as plug-ins and standalone through which AR appli-
cations can be built comparatively simply. These are commercial and some of them are
freely available. As discussed earlier, Vuforia can be installed as a plug-in in Unity [236]
and also has a free version. However, with complete support of tools certain amount needs
to be paid. Similarly, ARtoolkit is available standalone and a plug-in for Unity is available.
It is freely available for various platforms such as Android, iOS, Linux, and Windows.
Moreover, ARCore and ARKit are also available for Android and iOS, respectively, and can
work with Unity and Unreal authoring tools as a plug-in. ARCore is available and free
for developers. MAXST and Wikitude also can work in integration with Unity, though they
have a licensing price for the commercial version of the software. MAXST had a free
version as well. All these tools, the abovementioned libraries, and standalone tools are
depicted in Figure 9. Cinema 4D, Maya, Trimble SketchUp 3D modeling software, 3Ds
Max, and many others were created by a number of plug-ins that acted as authoring tools
for three-dimensional content. While 3D animation and modeling tools are not capable of
providing interactive features, it is very productive in creating three-dimensional scenes.
SketchUp can utilize the AR plug-in by creating a model for the content creators. This
model is then viewable in the AR scene provided by a free AR media player. The interactive
three-dimensional graphic authoring tools are also available for the creation of highly
interactive AR experiences, for instance, Wizard [ 237], Quest3D [238], and Unity [236]. All
of these authoring tools have their own speciﬁc ﬁeld of operation; however, Unity can be
utilized to create a variety of experiences. The following are examples that justify the use
of Unity over different solutions available:
• The AR plug-in of the Vuforia tracking library can be used with Unity 3D. This
integration will help Vuforia in the creation of AR applications for the android or iOS
platform.
• Similarly, the ARToolkit for Unity also provides marker-based experiences. It provides
both image and marker-based AR visualization and tracking.
In such integrations, the highly interactive experiences are created by the normal
Unity3D scripting interface and visual programming. Limitations of AR plug-ins: The
following are the limitations accrued with the AR plug-in:
• The need for proprietary software could arise for the content produced by the au-
thoring tool. The design provided by the authoring tools could restrict the user’s
interactive and interface designs.
• Moreover, the authoring tools can also restrict the conﬁgurations of hardware or
software within a certain limit.
Moreover, Nebeling et al. [239] reviewed the issues with the authoring tools of AR/VR.
The survey of the tools has identiﬁed three key issues. To make up for those limitations, new
tools are introduced for supporting the gesture-based interaction and rapid prototyping
of the AR/VR content. Moreover, this is done without having technical knowledge of
programming, gesture recognition, and 3D modeling. Mladenov et al. [ 240] review the
existing SDKs and aim to ﬁnd the most efﬁcient SDK for the AR applications used in
industrial environments. The paper reveals that currently available SDKs are very helpful
for users to create AR applications with the parameters of their choice in industrial settings.

===== PAGE 27 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 27 of 54
6.7. Summary
This section presents a detailed survey of different software and tools required for
creating an AR experience. The section outlines hardware devices used in AR technology
and various software to create an AR experience. It further elaborates on the software
libraries required and covers bother the aspects of the commercially available tools. Table 3
provides a stack of software libraries, plug-ins, supported platforms, and standalone
authoring tools. The ﬁgure also presents details of whether the mentioned tools are active
or inactive. As an example, BazAR is used in tracking and geometric calibration. It is an
open-source library for Linux or windows available under research-based GPL and can be
used for research to detect an object via camera, calibrate it, and initiate tracking to put a
basic virtual image on it; however, this library is not active at the present. Commercially
used AR tools such as plug-ins have the limitations of only working efﬁciently in the 2D
GUI and become problematic when used for 3D content. The advancement of technology
may bring about a change in the authoring tools by making them capable of being operated
for 3D and developing more active AR interfaces.

===== PAGE 28 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 28 of 54
Table 3. A summary of development and authoring tools for augmented reality application development.
Authoring Tool AR Component Features Research Based or
Commercial Active/Not Used in/by Software/Tool Platform Supported
OpenScene Graph Library
-OpenScene is a graph library
-Can be linked with OpenGL
and osgART
Researched/Commercial Active ARToolKit GNULinux/Windows/OSX
PTAM SLAM Tracking Library OpenSource/Available Under
GPL Research-Based
Can be used for research and
open source. However, for
productionARCore/ARKit
implementation of SLAMis
available/Not Active
Standalone Linux/OSX
BazAR Tracking and Geometric
Calibration
OpenSource/Available Under
GPL Research-Based
Can beused for research to
detectan object via camera,
calibrate it and initiatetracking
to put a basicvirtual image
onit/Not Active
Standalone Linux/Windows
Goblin XNA
-Platform for Mobile-based
AR
-Marker Based tracking with
ARTag
Free Windows Platform Research/Education Based
Can beused forresearch and
educationpurposes, to generate
3Dand track the
object/NotActive
Standalone Windows
Studierstube Open Tracker
-Open Source/Free
-Have Builtin Hardware
Tracking
-Used for Collaborative AR
Research/Education Based
Can beused forresearch and
educationpurposes to test
varioustracking and AR
apps/NotActive
Standalone Linux
Metaio SDK Image, Marker, Face, infrared,
and 3D object Tracking
-Support Localization
-Tracking
The source code can be
provided after proper
owner’s approval on their
website
Active Standalone Andoird/iOS
ARTag -Maker-Based (Fiducial)
Tracking
Tracking Library that support
AR application development No support available Not Active Standalone Windows
WikiTude Studio
-SLAM
-Image Tracking
-Calibration Manager
-Geo AR
-Inertial
It is an SDK that can help to
build an AR app without any
other tools needed for
Android, iOS, Windows, and
Linux.
Commercial Active
Native API, JavaScript API,
Unity Plugin, Cordova
Plugin, Flutter Plugin,
Windows, Linux, iOS,
Android
BuildAR Marker based tracking
-Standalone easy to create
new AR applications.
-
Free Not Active Standalone Windows

===== PAGE 29 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 29 of 54
Table 3. Cont.
Authoring Tool AR Component Features Research Based or
Commercial Active/Not Used in/by Software/Tool Platform Supported
AMIRE and
CATOMIR Standalone ARTools No support availble Active
ARCore
SLAM + Inertial forTracking
and understanding the
environment Integrated
Display
ARCore support Motion
tracking with SLAM and
Inertial, Depth
Understanding, Light
Estemation,
Free Active
Android, Android NDK,
Unity(AR Foundation), iOS,
Unreal, Web
Android, iOS
MS HoloLense
-Vision Based Tracking
-OST Display
-VST Display
Is an augmented reality
headset for running AR apps Commercial Active Unity, Unreal, Vuforia Windows 10
ARKit
-Motion Tracking
-Camera Scene Capture
-Advanced Scene Processing
With ARKit one can create a
complete AR application. It
has tracking, display and
development environment to
develop AR app.
Commercial for application
development Active Plugin Available for Unity iOS
Vuforia
Supports
-Marker less (vision-based)
and
-Marker based tracking
(Fiducial)
-Calibration Library
-A complete SDK for AR
application development.
-Supports many languages for
AR development for API
- C++, Java, Net
Free and Commercial both
versions are available. Active
-Standalone Native
development
-Plugin available for Unity
iOS, Android
ARToolKit
-Tracking Library Supports
both
-Video See Through(VST)
-Optical See Through(OST)
-ARTag variant of ARToolKit
supports Marker
based(Fiducial)
-C and C++ Language
Support for AR
-JARToolKit for Java Support
-A Modiﬁed Marker Base
-ARToolKitPlus
Free and Commercial both
are available. Active
-Standalone
-Unity plugin is also
available for Integration
with Unity libraries
Linux, Windows, McOS X
DeepAR (Creator
Studio)
Embdded Tracking, VST
Display
Standalone easy to create AR
applications for
non-programmers
Commercial Active DeepAR SDK Web SDK Windows, iOS, Android,

===== PAGE 30 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 30 of 54
7. Collaborative Research on Augmented Reality
In general, collaboration in augmented reality is the interaction of multiple users with
virtual objects in the real environment. This interaction is regardless of the users’ location,
i.e., they can participate remotely or have the same location. In this regard, we have two
types of collaborative AR: co-located collaborative AR and remote collaborative AR. We
mention it further in Figure 10.
7.1. Co-Located Collaborative AR
In this type of collaborative AR, the users interact with the virtual content rendered
in the real environment while sharing the same place. The participant are not remote in
such case. In this regard, Wells et al. [241] aim to determine the impact on the co-located
group activities by varying the complexity of AR models using mobile AR. The paper also
discusses different styles of collaborative AR such as:
• hlActive Discussion: A face-to-face discussion including all participants.
• Single Shared view: The participants focus on a single device.
• Disjoint and Shared View: Two to three participants focus on a single device.
• Disjoint and Distributed View: One to two people focus on their devices while the
others are discussing.
• Distributed View: Participants focus on their devices with no discussion.
• Distributive View with Discussion: Participants focus on their devices while discussing
in the group.
In this paper, the author did not contribute to the technology of co-located collaborative
AR, but rather performed analysis on the effectiveness of different collaborative AR.
Figure 10. Collaborative augmented reality research domains.
Grandi et al. [242] target the development of design approaches for synchronous col-
laboration to resolve complex manipulation tasks. For this, purpose fundamental concepts
of design interface, human collaboration, and manipulation are discussed. This research
the spiral model of research methodology which involves the development, planning,
analysis, and evaluation. In addition, Dong et al. [243] introduce “ARVita”, a system where
multiple users can interact with virtual simulations of engineering processes by wearing a
head-mounted display. This system uses a co-located AR technique where the users are
sitting around a table.

===== PAGE 31 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 31 of 54
7.1.1. Applications of Co-located Collaborative AR
Kim et al. [244] propose a PDIE model to make a STEAM educational class while incor-
porating AR technology into the system. Furthermore, the “Aurasma” application is used
to promote AR in education. In addition, Kanzanidis et al. [245] focus on teaching mobile
programming using synchronous co-located collaborative AR mobile applications in which
students are distributed in groups. The result showed that the students were satisﬁed with
this learning methodology. Moreover, Chang et al. [246] explore the use of a mobile AR
(MAR) application to teach interior design activities to students. The results identiﬁed
that the students who were exposed to MAR showed more effectiveness in learning than
those who were taught traditionally. Lastly, Sarkar et al. [247] discuss three aspects of syn-
chronous co-located collaboration-based problem-solving: ﬁrst, students’ perspectives on
AR learning activities, either in dyads or individually are determined; second, the approach
adopted by students while problem-solving is determined; third, the students’ motivation
for using ScholAR is determined. Statistical results suggested that 90.4% students preferred
the collaborative AR experience, i.e., in dyads. Meanwhile, motivation level and usability
scores were higher for individual experiences. Grandi et al. [248] introduce the design for
the collaborative manipulation of AR objects using mobile AR. This approach has two main
features. It provides a shared medium for collaboration and manipulation of 3D objects as
well as provides precise control of DoF transformations. Moreover, strategies are presented
to make this system more efﬁcient for users in pairs. Akccayir et al. [249] explore the impact
of AR on the laboratory work of university students and their attitudes toward laboratories.
This study used the quasi-experimental design with 76 participants—ﬁrst year students
aged 18–20 years. Both qualitative and quantitative methods were used for the analyses
of data. A ﬁve-week implementation of the experiment proved that the use of AR in the
laboratory signiﬁcantly improved the laboratory skills of the students. However, some
teachers and students also discussed some of the negative impacts of other aspects of AR.
Rekimoto et al. [250] propose a collaborative AR system called TransVision. In this system,
two or more users use a see-through display to look at the virtual objects rendered in a real
environment using synchronous co-located collaborative AR. Oda et al. [ 251] propose a
technique for avoiding interference for hand-held synchronous co-located collaborative AR.
This study is based on ﬁrst-person two-player shooting AR games.Benko et al. [87] present
a collaborative augmented reality and mixed reality system called “VITA” or “Visual In-
teraction Tool For Archaeology”. They have an off-site visualization system that allows
multiple users to interact with a virtual archaeological object. Franz et al. [ 88] present a
system of collaborative AR for museums in which multiple users can interact in a shared
environment. Huynh et al. [252] introduce art of defense (AoD), a co-located augmented
reality board game that combines handheld devices with physical game pieces to create
a unique experience of a merged physical and virtual game. Nilsson et al. [253] focus on
a multi-user collaborative AR application as a tool for supporting collaboration between
different organizations such as rescue services, police, and military organizations in a
critical situation.
7.1.2. Asynchronous Co-Located Collaborative AR
Tseng et al. [254] present an asynchronous annotation system for collaborative aug-
mented reality. This system can attribute virtual annotations with the real world due to
a number of distinguishing capabilities, i.e., playing back, placing, and organizing. Ex-
tra context information is preserved by the recording of the perspective of the annotator.
Furthermore, Kashara et al. [255] introduce “Second Surface”, an asynchronous co-located
collaborative AR system. It allows the users to render images, text, or drawings in a real
environment. These objects are stored in the data server and can be accessed later on.
7.2. Remote Collaborative AR
In this type of collaborative AR, all the users have different environments. They
can interact with virtual objects remotely from any location. A number of studies have

===== PAGE 32 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 32 of 54
been done in this regard. Billinghurst et al. [ 256] introduce a wearable collaborative
augmented reality system called “WearCom” to communicate with multiple remote people.
Stafford et al. [ 257] present God-like interaction techniques for collaboration between
outdoor AR and indoor tabletop users. This paper also describes a series of applications for
collaboration. Gauglitz et al. [258] focus on a touchscreen interface for creating annotations
in a collaborative AR environment. Moreover, this interface is also capable of virtually
navigating a scene reconstructed live in 3D. Boonbrahm et al. [259] aim to develop a design
model for remote collaboration. The research introduces the multiple marker technique to
develop a very stable system that allows users from different locations to collaborate which
also improves the accuracy. Li et al. [260] suggest the viewing of a collaborative exhibit
has been considerably improved by introducing the distance-driven user interface (DUI).
Poretski et al. [ 261] describe the behavioral challenges faced in interaction with virtual
objects during remote collaborative AR. An experiment was performed to study users’
interaction with shared virtual objects in AR. Clergeaud et al. [262] tackle the limitations of
collaboration in aerospace industrial designs. In addition, the authors propose prototype
designs to address these limitations. Oda et al. [ 263] present the GARDEN (gesturing
in an augmented reality depth-mapped environment) technique for 3D referencing in a
collaborative augmented reality environment. The result shows that this technique is more
accurate than the other comparisons. Muller et al. [85] investigate the inﬂuence of shared
virtual landmarks (SVLs) on communication behavior and user experience. The results
show that enhancement in user experience when SVLs were provided. Mahmood et al. [264]
present a remote collaborative system for co-presence and sharing information using mixed
reality. The results show improvements in user collaborative analysis experience.
7.2.1. Applications of Remote Collaborative AR
Munoz et al. [265] present a system called GLUEPS-AR to help teachers in learning
situations by integrating AR and web technologies i.e., Web 2.0 tools and virtual learning
environments (VLEs) [266]. Bin et al. [267] propose a system to enhance the learning expe-
rience of the students using collaborative mobile augmented reality learning application
(CoMARLA). The application was used to teach ICT to students. The results showed im-
provement in the learning of the students using CoMARLA. Dunleavy et al. [268] explore
the beneﬁts and drawbacks of collaborative augmented reality simulations in learning.
Moreover, a collaborative AR system was proposed for computers independent of location,
i.e., indoor or outdoor. Maimone et al. [269] introduce a telepresence system with real-time
3D capture for remote users to improve communication using depth cameras. Moreover, it
also discusses the limitations of previous telepresence systems. Gauglitz et al. [270] present
an annotation-based remote collaboration AR system for mobiles. In this system, the remote
user can explore the scene regardless of the local user’s camera position. Moreover, they can
also communicate through annotations visible on the screen. Guo et al. [271] introduce an
app, known as Block, that enables the users to collaborate irrespective of their geographic
position, i.e., they can be either co-located or remote. Moreover, they can collaborate either
asynchronously or synchronously. This app allows users to create structures that persist in
the real environment. The result of the study suggested that people preferred synchronous
and collocated collaboration, particularly one that was not restricted by time and space.
Zhang et al. [272] propose a collaborative augmented reality for socialization app (CARS).
This app improves the user’s perception of the quality of the experience. CARS beneﬁts the
user, application, and system on various levels. It reduces the use of computer resources,
end-to-end latency, and networking. Results of the experiment suggest that CARS acts
more efﬁciently for users of cloud-based AR applications. Moreover, on mobile phones,
it reduces the latency level by up to 40%. Grandi et al. [ 242] propose an edge-assisted
system, known as CollabAR, which combines both collaboration image recognition and
distortion tolerance. Collaboration image recognition enhances recognition accuracy by
exploiting the “spatial-temporal" correlation. The result of the experiment suggested that
this system has signiﬁcantly decreased the end-to-end system latency up to 17.8 ms for a

===== PAGE 33 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 33 of 54
smartphone. Additionally, recognition accuracy for images with stronger distortions was
found to be 96%.
7.2.2. Synchronous Remote Collaborative AR
Lien et al. [273] present a system called “Pixel-Point Volume Segmentation” in col-
laborative AR. This system is used for object references. Moreover, one user can locate
the objects with the help of circles drawn on the screen by other users in a collaborative
environment. Huang et al. [274] focus on sharing hand gestures and sketches between a
local user and a remote user by using collaborative AR. The system is named “Handsin-
Touch”. Ou et al. [275] present the DOVE (drawing over video environment) system, which
integrates live-video and gestures in collaborative AR. This system is designed to perform
remote physical tasks in a collaborative environment. Datcu et al. [276] present the creation
and evaluation of the handheld AR system. This is done particularly to investigate the
remote forensic and co-located and to support team-situational awareness. Three experi-
enced investigators evaluated this system in two steps. First, it was investigated with one
remote and one local investigator. Secondly, with one remote and two local investigators.
Results of the study suggest the use of this technology resolves the limitation of HMDs.
Tait et al. [277] propose the AR-based remote collaboration that supports view indepen-
dence. The main aim of the system was to enable the remote user to help the local user with
object placement. The remote user uses a 3D reconstruction of the environment to indepen-
dently ﬁnd the local user’s scene. Moreover, a remote user can also place the virtual cues in
the scene visible to the local user. The major advantage of this system is that it allows the
remote user to have an independent scene in the shared task space. Fang et al. [278] focus
on enhancing the 3D feel of immersive interaction by reducing communication barriers.
WebRTC, a real-time video communication framework, is developed to enable the operator
site’s ﬁrst-hand view of the remote user. Node.js and WebSocket, virtual canvas-based
whiteboards, are developed which are usable in different aspects of life. Mora et al. [279]
explain the CroMAR system. The authors aim to help the users in crowd management who
are deployed in a planned outdoor event. CroMAR allows the users to share viewpoints
via email, and geo-localized tags allow the users to visualize the outdoor environment
and rate these tags. Adcock et al. [ 280] present three remote spacial augmented reality
systems “Composite Wedge”, “Vector Box”, and “Eyelight” for off-surface 3D viewpoints
visualization. In this system, the physical world environment of a remote user can be
seen by the local user. Lincoln et al. [281] focus on a system of robotic avatars of humans
in a synchronous remote collaborative environment. It uses cameras and projectors to
render a humanoid animatronic model which can be seen by multiple users. This system is
called “Animatronic Shader Lamps Avatars”. Komiyama et al. [ 282] present a synchronous
remote collaborative AR system. It can transition between ﬁrst person and third person
view during collaboration. Moreover, the local user can observe the environment of the
remote user. Lehment et al. [283] present an automatically aligned videoconferencing AR
system. In this system, the remote user is rendered and aligned on the display of the local
user. This alignment is done automatically regarding the local user’s real environment
without modifying it. Oda et al. [284] present a remote collaborative system for guidance in
a collaborative environment. In this system, the remote expert can guide a local user with
the help of both AR and VR. The remote expert can create virtual replicas of real objects
to guide a local user. Piumsomboon et al. [ 285] introduce an adaptive avatar system in
mixed reality (MR) called “Mini Me” between a remote user using VR and a local user
using AR technology. The results show that it improves the overall experience of MR and
social presence. Piumsomboon et al. [ 286] present “CoVAR”, a collaboration consisting
of both AR and VR technologies. A local user can share their environment with a remote
VR user. It supports gestures, head, and eye gaze to improve the collaboration experience.
Teo et al. [287] present a system that captures a 360 panorama video of one user and shares
it with the other remote user in a mixed reality collaboration. In this system, the users
communicate through hand gestures and visual annotation. Thanyadit et al. [288] introduce

===== PAGE 34 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 34 of 54
a system where the instructor can observe students in a virtual environment. The system is
called “ObserVAR” and uses augmented reality to observe students’ gazes in a virtual envi-
ronment. Results show that this system is more improved and ﬂexible in several scenarios.
Sodhi et al. [289] present a synchronous remote collaborative system called “BeThere” to
explore 3D gestures and spatial input. This system enables a remote user to perform virtual
interaction in the local user’s real environment. Ong et al. [ 290] propose a collaborative
system in which 3D objects can be seen by all the users in a collaborative environment.
Moreover, the changes made to these objects are also observed by the users. Butz et al. [84]
present EMMIE (environment management for multi-user information environments) in a
collaborative augmented reality environment in which virtual objects can be manipulated
by the users. In addition, this manipulation is visible to each user of this system.
7.2.3. Asynchronous Remote Collaborative AR
Irlitti et al. [ 291] explore the challenges faced during the use of asynchronous col-
laborative AR. Moreover, the author further discusses how to enhance communication
while using asynchronous collaborative AR. Quasi-systems do not fulﬁll Azuma’s [292]
deﬁnition of AR technology. However, they are very good at executing certain aspects of
AR as other full AR devices are doing. For instance, mixed-space collaborative work in
a virtual theater [268]. This system explained that if someone wants two groups to pay
attention to each other, a common spatial frame of reference should be created to have a
better experience of social presence. In the spatially aware educational system, students
were using location-aware smartphones to resolve riddles. This was very useful in the edu-
cational system because it supported both engagement and social presence [245,265,269].
However, this system did not align the 3D virtual content in the virtual space. Therefore, it
was not a true AR system. In order to capture a remote 3D scene, Fuchs and Maimone [293]
developed an algorithm. They also developed a proof of concept for teleconferencing.
For capturing images, RGB-D cameras were used. The remote scene was displayed on the
3D stereoscopic screen. These systems were not fully AR, but they still exhibited a very
good immersion. Akussah et al. [294] focus on developing a marker-based collaborative
augmented reality app for learning mathematics. First, the system focuses on individual
experience and later on expands it to collaborative AR.
7.3. Summary
This section provides comprehensive details on collaborative augmented reality which
is broadly classiﬁed into co-located collaborative AR, where participants collaborate with
each other in geographically the same location, and remote collaboration. The applications
of both approaches are presented as well. Co-located collaborative AR is mostly adopted
in learning realms for sharing information, for example, in museums. On the other hand,
in remote collaborative AR the remote user can explore the scene regardless of the local
user’s camera position. The applications of this technology are mostly found in education.
8. AR Interaction and Input Technologies
The interaction and input technologies are detailed in this section. There are a number
of input methods that are utilized in AR technologies. First, multimode and 3D interfaces
such as speech, gesture and handheld wands. Second, the mouse, and keyboard tradi-
tional two-dimensional user interfaces (UI). The type of interaction task needed for the
interface deﬁnes which input method would be utilized in the application. A variety of
interfaces have been developed: three-dimensional user interfaces, tangible user interfaces,
multimedia interfaces, natural user interfaces, and information browsers.
8.1. AR Information Browsers
Wikitude and Navicam are one of the most popular examples of AR information
browsers. The only problem with AR browsers is that they cannot provide direct interaction
with the virtual objects.

===== PAGE 35 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 35 of 54
8.2. Three-Dimensional User Interfaces
A three-dimensional user interface uses the controllers for providing the interaction
with virtual content. By using the traditional 3D user interface techniques, we can directly
interact with the three-dimensional object in the virtual space. There are a number of 3D
user interface interaction techniques as follows: 3D motion tracking sensors are one of the
most commonly used devices for AR interaction. The motion tracking sensors allow the
following functions: tracking the parts of the user’s body and allow pointing as well as the
manipulation of the virtual objects [295]. Haptic devices are also used for interacting with
AR environments [296–298]. They mainly used as 3D pointing devices. In addition, they
provide tactile and forces feedback. This will create the illusion of a physical object existing
in the real world. Thereby, it helps in complementing the virtual experience. They are used
in training, entertainment, and design-related AR applications.
8.3. T angible User Interface
The tangible user interface is one of the main concepts of human–computer interface
technology research. In this, the physical object is used for interaction [299]. It bridges the
gap between the physical and the virtual object [300]. Chessa et al. incorporated grasping
behavior in a virtual reality systems [301], while Han et al. presented and evaluated hand
interaction techniques using tactile feedback (haptics) and physical grasping by mapping a
real object with virtual objects [302].
8.4. Natural User Interfaces in AR
Recently, more accurate gesture and motion-based interactions for AR and VR applica-
tions have become extensively available due to the commercialization of depth cameras
such as Microsoft Kinect and technical advances. Bare-hand interaction with a virtual
object was made possible by the introduction of a depth camera. It provided physical
interaction by tracking the dexterous hand motion. For instance, the physical objects and
the user’s hands were recognized by the use of Kinect Camera, designed by the Microsoft
HoloDesk [299]. The virtual objects were shown on the optical see-through AR workbench.
It also allowed the users to interact with the virtual objects presented on the AR workbench.
The user-deﬁned gestures have been categorized into sets by the Piumsomboon [300]. This
set can be utilized in AR applications for accomplishing different tasks. In addition, some
of the mobile-based depth-sensing cameras are also under investigation. For instance,
the SoftKinetic and Myo gesture armband controller. SodtKinetic is aimed at developing
hand gesture interaction in mobile phones and wearable devices more accurately, while the
Myo gesture armband controller is a biometric sensor that provides interaction in wearable
and mobile environments.
8.5. Multimodal Interaction in AR
In addition to speech and gesture recognition, there are other types of voice recognition
are being investigated. For example, the whistle-recognition system was developed by
Lindeman [303] in mobile AR games. In this, the user had to whistle the right length
and pitch to intimidate the virtual creatures in the game. Summary: The common input
techniques and input methods have been examined in this section. These included simple
information browsers and complex AR interfaces. The simple ones have very little support
for the interaction and virtual content, while the complex interfaces were able to recognize
even the speech and gesture inputs. A wide range of input methods are available for the
AR interface; however, they are needed to be designed carefully. The following section
delineates the research into the interface pattern, design, and guideline for AR experiences.
9. Design Guidelines and Interface Pattern
The previous section detailed the wide range of different AR input and interaction
technologies; however, more rigorous research is required to design the AR experience. This
section explores the interface patterns and design guidelines to develop an AR experience.

===== PAGE 36 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 36 of 54
The development of new interfaces goes through four main steps. First, the prototype
is demonstrated. Second, interaction techniques are adopted from the other interface
metaphors. Third, new interface metaphors are developed that are appropriate to the
medium. Finally, the formal theoretical models are developed for modeling the interaction
of users. In this regard, Wang et al. [304] employ user-centered AR instruction (UcAI) in
procedural tasks. Thirty participants were selected for the experiment while having both the
control and experiment groups. The result of the experiment suggested that introduction
of UcAI increased the user’s spatial cognitive ability, particularly in the high-precision
operational task. This research has the potential of guiding advanced AR instruction designs
to perform tasks of high cognitive complexity. For instance, WIMP (windows, icons, menus,
and pointers) is a very well-known desktop metaphor. In development, it has gone through
all of these stages. There are methods developed that are used to predict the time taken by
the mouse will select an icon of a given size. These are known as formal theoretical models.
Fitts law [305] is among those models that help in determining the pointing times in the
user interfaces. There are also a number of virtual reality interfaces available that are at
the third stage with reference to the techniques available. For example, the manipulation
and selection in immersive virtual worlds can be done by using the go-go interaction
method [306]. On the other hand, as evident in the previous section, AR interfaces have
barely surpassed the ﬁrst two stages. Similarly, a number of AR interaction methods
and technologies are available; however, by and large, they are only the extensions or
versions of the existing 3D and 2D techniques present in mobiles, laptops, or AR interfaces.
For instance, mobile phone experiences such as the gesture application and the touch screen
input are added to AR. Therefore, there is a dire need to develop AR-speciﬁc interaction
techniques and interface metaphors [307]. A deeper analysis and study of AR interfaces
will help in the development of the appropriate metaphor interfaces. AR interfaces are
unique in the sense that they need to develop close interaction between the real and the
virtual worlds. A researcher, MacIntyre, has argued that the deﬁnition and the fusion of the
virtual and real worlds are required for creating an AR design [308]. The primary goal of
this is to depict the physical objects and user input onto the computer-generated graphics.
This is done by using a suitable interaction interface. As a result, an AR design should have
three components:
• The physical object.
• The virtual image to be developed.
• An interface to create an interaction between the physical world and the virtual objects.
Use of design patterns could be an alternative technique to develop the AR interface de-
sign. These design patterns are most commonly used in the ﬁelds of computer science and
design interface. Alexander has deﬁned the use of design patterns in the following words:
“Each pattern describes a problem that occurs over and over again in our environment,
and then describes the core of the solution to that problem in such a way that you can use
this solution a million times over, without ever doing it the same way twice” [309,310]. The
pattern language approach could be used to enhance AR development, as suggested by Re-
icher [311]. This idea has evolved from the earlier research works of MacWilliam [312]. This
approach has two main functionalities. First, it is more focused on the software engineering
aspect. Secondly, it suggests ways to develop complex AR systems by combining different
modules of design patterns. So, they describe each pattern by the number of its aspects such
as name, motivation, goal, description, consequences, known project usage, and general
usability. One of the most notable examples of it is the DWARF framework [313]. DWARF is
a component-based AR framework that is developed through the design pattern approach.
In contrast to the pattern language approach, the user experience of design in the AR hand-
held device could be used for developing designs. This was described by Xu and the main
concern was pre-patterns. Pre-patterns are the components that bridge the gap between
the game design and the interaction design. For determining the method of using of design
patterns,seamful design could be used. This suggests that the designer should integrate
the AR handheld game design and the technology in such a way that they should blend

===== PAGE 37 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 37 of 54
into each other. Some users need more attention for designing effective AR experiences;
therefore, the designing of special needs is another intervention to resolve this discrepancy.
For instance, as pointed out by Rand and Maclntyre [314], in designing an AR system for
the age group of 6–9, the developmental stages of the children should be accounted for
in it. The research has also suggested that a powerful educational experience could be
created through the use of AR. In addition to this development, it was also stated that the
developmental stages of the students should be considered [315,316]. However, there is
no extensive research that suggests the development of AR experiences for children [317].
Radu, in his paper, has determined the key four areas that should be considered while
designing AR for children: attention, motor, special, logic, and memory abilities [318].
10. Security, Trust, and Collaborative AR
Security is very important in augmented reality, especially in collaborative augmented
reality. While using collaborative AR applications, the data are exposed to external attacks,
which increases concerns about security relating to AR technologies. Moreover, if the
users who share the same virtual collaborative environments are unknown to each other, it
also elevates these issues. In [319], the basic premise of the research is that the developed
abstraction device not only improves the privacy but also the performance of the AR
apps, which lays the groundwork for the development of future OS support for AR apps.
The results suggested that the prototype enables secure ofﬂoading of heavyweight, incurs
negligible overhead, and improves the overall performance of the app. In [320], the authors
aim to resolve security and privacy challenges in multi-user AR applications. They have
introduced an AR-sharing module along with systematized designs and representative case
studies for functionality and security. This module is implemented as a prototype known
as ArShare for the HoloLens. Finally, it also lays the foundation for the development
of fully ﬂedged and secure multi-user AR interaction. In [ 321], the authors used AR
smart glasses to detail the “security and safety” aspect of AR applications as a case study.
In the experiment, cloud-based architecture is linked to the oil extractor in combination
with Vuzix Blade smart glasses. For security purposes, this app sends real-time signals if a
dangerous situation arrives. In [322], deep learning is used to make the adaptive policies for
generating the visual output in AR devices. Simulations are used that automatically detect
the situation and generate policies and protect the system against disastrous malicious
content. In [323], the authors discussed the case study of challenges faced by VR and AR in
the ﬁeld of security and privacy. The results showed that the attack reached the target of
distance 1.5 m with 90 percent accuracy when using a four-digit password. In [ 324], the
authors provide details and goals for developing security. They discuss the challenges faced
in the development of edge computing architecture which also includes the discussion
regarding reducing security risks. The main idea of the paper is to detail the design
of security measures for both AR and non-AR devices. In [ 325], the authors presented
that the handling of multi-user outputs and handling of data are demonstrated are the
two main obstacles in achieving security and privacy of AR devices. It further provides
new opportunities that can signiﬁcantly improve the security and privacy realm of AR.
In [326], the authors introduce the authentication tool for ensuring security and privacy
in AR environments. For these purposes, the graphical user password is fused with the
AR environments. A doodle password is created by the touch-gesture-recognition on
a mobile phone, and then doodles are matched in real-time size. Additionally, doodles
are matched with the AR environment. In [ 327], the authors discussed the immersive
nature of augmented reality engenders signiﬁcant threats in the realm of security and
privacy. They further explore the aspects of securing buggy AR output. In [ 328], the
authors employ the case study of an Android app, “Google Translator”, to detect and avoid
variant privacy leaks. In addition, this research proposes the foundational framework to
detect unnecessary privacy leaks. In [ 329], the authors discuss the AR security-related
issues on the web. The security related vulnerabilities are identiﬁed and then engineering
guidelines are proposed to make AR implementation secure. In [330], the past ten years

===== PAGE 38 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 38 of 54
of research work of the author, starting from 2011, in the ﬁeld of augmented reality is
presented. The main idea of the paper is to ﬁgure out the potential problems and to predict
the future for the next ten years. It also explains the systematization for future work
and focuses on evaluating AR security research. In [ 331], the authors presented various
AR-related security issues and identiﬁed managing the virtual content in the real space as
a challenge in making AR spaces secure for single and multi-users. The authors in [332]
believe that there is a dire need of cybersecurity risks in the AR world. The introduction of
systemized and universal policy modules for the AR architecture is a viable solution for
mitigating security risks in AR. In [333], the authors discuss the challenge of enabling the
different AR apps to augment the user’s world experience simultaneously, pointing out the
conﬂicts between the AR applications.
11. Summary
In this paper, the authors have reviewed the literature extensively in terms of tracking
and displays technology, AR, and collaborative AR, as can be seen in Figure 10. It has been
observed that collaborative AR has further two classiﬁcations i.e., co-located AR and remote
collaboration [334]. Each of these collocated and remote collaborations has two further
types i.e., synchronous and asynchronous. In remote collaborative AR, there are a number
of use cases wherein it has been observed that trust management is too important a factor to
consider because there are unknown parties that participate in remote activities to interact
with each other and as such, they are unknown to each other as well [21,335–338]. There has
been a lack of trust and security concerns during this remote collaboration. There are more
chances of intrusion and vulnerabilities that can be possibly exploited [331,339,340]. One
such collaboration is from the tourism sector, which has boosted the economy, especially
in the pandemic era when physical interactors were not allowed [341]. To address these
concerns, this research felt the need to ensure that the communication has integrity and for
this purpose, the research utilized state-of-the-art blockchain infrastructure for collaborative
applications in AR. The paper has proposed a complete secure framework wherein different
applications working remotely are having a real feeling of trust in each other [17,342,343].
The participants within the collaborative AR subscribed to a trusted environment to further
make interaction with each other in a secure fashion while their communication was
protected through state-of-the-art blockchain infrastructure [338,344]. A model of such an
application is shown in Figure 11.
Figure 11. A model of blockchain-based trusted and secured collaborative AR system.
Figure 12 demonstrates the initiation of the AR App in step 1, while in step 2 of
Figure 12, the blockchain is initiated to record transactions related to sign-up, record
audio calls, proceed with payment/subscription, etc. In step 3, when the transaction is
established, AR is initiated, which enables the visitor to receive guidance from the travel
guide. The app creates a map of the real environment. The created map and the vision
provide a SLAM, i.e., SLAM provides an overall vision and details of different objects in

===== PAGE 39 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 39 of 54
the real world. Inertial tracking controls the movement and direction in the augmented
reality application. The virtual objects are then placed after identifying vision and tracking.
In a collaborative environment, the guides are provided with an option of annotation so
they can circle a particular object or spot different locations and landmarks or point to
different incidents [16].
Figure 12. Sharing of the real-time environment of CAR tourist app for multiple users [16].
12. Directions for Research
The commercialization efforts of companies have made AR a mainstream ﬁeld. How-
ever, for the technology to reach its full potential, the number of research areas should
be expanded. Azuma has explained the three major obstacles in the way of AR: inter-
face limitation, technological limitations, and the issue of social acceptance. In order to
overcome these barriers, the two major models are developed: ﬁrst, Roger’s innovation
diffusion theory [345] and the technology acceptance model (developed by Martinez) [346].
Roger has explained the following major restriction towards the adoption of this technol-
ogy: limited computational power of AR technology, social acceptance, no AR standards,
tracking inaccuracy, and overloading of information. The main research trends in display
technology, user interface, and tracking were identiﬁed by Zho by evaluating ten years
of ISMAR papers. The research has been conducted in a wide number of areas except
for social acceptance. This section aims at exploring future opportunities and ongoing
research in the ﬁeld of AR, particularly in the four key areas: display, tracking, interaction,
and social acceptance. Moreover, there are a number of other topics including evalua-
tion techniques, visualization methods, applications, authoring and content-creating tools,
rendering methods, and some other areas.
13. Conclusions
This document has detailed a number of research papers that address certain problems
of AR. For instance, AR tracking techniques are detailed in Section 3. Display technologies,
such as VST and OST, and its related calibration techniques in Section 4, authoring tools in
Section 6, collaborative AR in Section 7, AR interaction in Section 8, and design guidelines
in Section 9. Finally, promising security and trust-related papers are discussed in the
ﬁnal section. We presented the problem statement and a short solution to the problem
is provided. These aspects should be covered in future research and the most pertinent
among these are the hybrid AR interfaces, social acceptance, etc. The speed of research is
signiﬁcantly increasing, and AR technology is going to dramatically impact our lives in the
next 20 years.

===== PAGE 40 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 40 of 54
Author Contributions: Conceptualization of the paper is done by T.A.S. Sections Organization, is
mostly written by T.A.S. and S.J.; The protype implementation is done by the development team,
however, the administration and coordination is performed by A.A., A.N. (Abdullah Namoun) and
A.B.A.; Validation is done by A.A. and A.N. (Adnan Nadeem); Formal Analysis is done by T.A.S.
and S.J.; Investigation, T.A.S.; Resources and Data Curation, is done by A.N. (Adnan Nadeem);
Writing—Original Draft Preparation, is done by T.A.S. and S.J., Writing—Review & Editing is carried
out by H.B.A.; Visualization is mostly done by T.A.S. and M.S.S.; Supervision, is done by T.A.S.;
Project Administration, is done by A.A.; Funding Acquisition, T.A.S. All authors have read and
agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This project is funded by the Deputyship For Research and Innovation, Ministry of Educa-
tion, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, under project No (20/17), titled Digital Transformation of Madinah
Landmarks using Augmented Reality.
Acknowledgments: Thanks to the Deanship of Research, Islamic University of Madinah. We would
like to extend special thanks to our other team members (Anas and his development team at 360Folio,
Ali Ullah and Sajjad Hussain Khan) who participated in the development, writeup, and ﬁnding of
historical data. Ali Ullah has a great ability to understand difﬁcult topics in AR, such as calibration
and tracking.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Berciu, A.G.; Dulf, E.H.; Stefan, I.A. Flexible Augmented Reality-Based Health Solution for Medication Weight Establishment.
Processes 2022, 10, 219. [CrossRef]
2. Sırakaya, M.; Alsancak Sırakaya, D. Augmented reality in STEM education: A systematic review.Interact. Learn. Environ. 2022,
30, 1556–1569. [CrossRef]
3. Chouchene, A.; Ventura Carvalho, A.; Charrua-Santos, F.; Barhoumi, W. Augmented Reality-Based Framework Supporting Visual
Inspection for Automotive Industry. Appl. Syst. Innov. 2022, 5, 48. [CrossRef]
4. Augmented Reality and Virtual Reality Market. 2022, Available online: https://www.marketsandmarkets.com/Market-Reports/
augmented-reality-virtual-reality-market-1185.html?gclid=CjwKCAjwtKmaBhBMEiwAyINuwNi_hv87XEg2rZqpBVQGtOr1
gL8mNrLbRsYaSZmNYOXF4Za63Bhb4xoChZkQAvD_BwE (accessed on 16 October 2022).
5. Lee, W.H.; Lee, H.K. The usability attributes and evaluation measurements of mobile media AR (augmented reality). Cogent Arts
Humanit. 2016, 3, 1241171. [CrossRef]
6. Mourtzis, D.; Angelopoulos, J.; Panopoulos, N. Challenges and Opportunities for Integrating Augmented Reality and Computa-
tional Fluid Dynamics Modeling under the Framework of Industry 4.0. Procedia CIRP 2022, 106, 215–220. [CrossRef]
7. Carter, D. Immersive Employee Experiences in the Metaverse: Virtual Work Environments, Augmented Analytics Tools, and
Sensory and Tracking Technologies. Psychosociological Issues Hum. Resour. Manag. 2022, 10, 35–49.
8. Zhang, Z.; Wen, F.; Sun, Z.; Guo, X.; He, T.; Lee, C. Artiﬁcial Intelligence-Enabled Sensing Technologies in the 5G/Internet of
Things Era: From Virtual Reality/Augmented Reality to the Digital Twin. Adv. Intell. Syst. 2022, 2022, 2100228. [CrossRef]
9. Yu, J.; Denham, A.R.; Searight, E. A systematic review of augmented reality game-based Learning in STEM education. Educ.
T echnol. Res. Dev. 2022, 70, 1169–1194.
10. Moro, M.; Marchesi, G.; Hesse, F.; Odone, F.; Casadio, M. Markerless vs. Marker-Based Gait Analysis: A Proof of Concept Study.
Sensors 2022, 22, 2011. [CrossRef]
11. Pulli, K. 11–2: Invited Paper: Meta 2: Immersive Optical-See-Through Augmented Reality. In SID Symposium Digest of T echnical
Papers; Wiley Online Library: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2017; Volume 48, pp. 132–133.
12. Wilson, A.; Hua, H. Design and demonstration of a vari-focal optical see-through head-mounted display using freeform Alvarez
lenses. Opt. Express 2019, 27, 15627–15637. [CrossRef]
13. Khan, D.; Ullah, S.; Yan, D.M.; Rabbi, I.; Richard, P .; Hoang, T.; Billinghurst, M.; Zhang, X. Robust tracking through the design of
high quality ﬁducial markers: an optimization tool for ARToolKit.IEEE Access 2018, 6, 22421–22433. [CrossRef]
14. Ramadar, P . NS Flartoolkit Flash Augmented Reality Alt Actionscript, Journal=Buku AR Online Solo. 2014. Available online:
https://artoolworks.com/products/open-source-software/ﬂartoolkit-2.html (accessed on 16 October 2022).
15. Linowes, J.; Babilinski, K. Augmented Reality for Developers: Build Practical Augmented Reality Applications with Unity, ARCore, ARKit,
and Vuforia; Packt Publishing Ltd.: Birmingham, UK, 2017.
16. Syed, T.A.; Jan, S.; Siddiqui, M.S.; Alzahrani, A.; Nadeem, A.; Ali, A.; Ullah, A. CAR-Tourist: An Integrity-Preserved Collaborative
Augmented Reality Framework-Tourism as a Use-Case. Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 12022. [CrossRef]
17. Syed, T.A.; Alzahrani, A.; Jan, S.; Siddiqui, M.S.; Nadeem, A.; Alghamdi, T. A comparative analysis of blockchain architecture and
its applications: Problems and recommendations. IEEE Access 2019, 7, 176838–176869. [CrossRef]

===== PAGE 41 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 41 of 54
18. Agati, S.S.; Bauer, R.D.; Hounsell, M.d.S.; Paterno, A.S. Augmented reality for manual assembly in industry 4.0: Gathering
guidelines. In Proceedings of the 2020 22nd Symposium on Virtual and Augmented Reality (SVR), Porto de Galinhas, Brazil,
7–10 November 2020; pp. 179–188.
19. Brooker, J. The polytechnic ghost: Pepper’s ghost, metempsychosis and the magic lantern at the Royal Polytechnic Institution.
Early Pop. Vis. Cult. 2007, 5, 189–206. [CrossRef]
20. Drascic, D.; Grodski, J.J.; Milgram, P .; Ruffo, K.; Wong, P .; Zhai, S. ARGOS: A display system for augmenting reality. In Proceed-
ings of the INTERACT’93 and CHI’93 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Amsterdam, The Netherlands,
24–29 April 1993; p. 521.
21. Abdeen, M.; Jan, S.; Khan, S.; Ali, T. Employing Takaful Islamic Banking Through State of The Art Blockchain: A Case Study. Int.
J. Adv. Comput. Sci. Appl. 2019, 10, 648–654. [CrossRef]
22. Kerber, R. Advanced tactic targeted grocer. The Boston Globe. 2008. Available online: https://seclists.org/isn/2008/Mar/126
(accessed on 20 October 2022).
23. Mansﬁeld-Devine, S. Interview: BYOD and the enterprise network. Comput. Fraud Secur. 2012, 2012, 14–17. [CrossRef]
24. Nofer, M.; Gomber, P .; Hinz, O.; Schiereck, D. Blockchain. Bus. Inf. Syst. Eng. 2017, 59, 183–187. [CrossRef]
25. Behzadan, A.H.; Aziz, Z.; Anumba, C.J.; Kamat, V .R. Ubiquitous location tracking for context-speciﬁc information delivery on
construction sites. Autom. Constr. 2008, 17, 737–748. [CrossRef]
26. Bottani, E.; Vignali, G. Augmented reality technology in the manufacturing industry: A review of the last decade. IISE T rans.
2019, 51, 284–310. [CrossRef]
27. Sereno, M.; Wang, X.; Besançon, L.; McGufﬁn, M.J.; Isenberg, T. Collaborative work in augmented reality: A survey.IEEE T rans.
Vis. Comput. Graph. 2020, 28, 2530–2549. [CrossRef]
28. Ens, B.; Quigley, A.; Yeo, H.S.; Irani, P .; Piumsomboon, T.; Billinghurst, M. Counterpoint: Exploring mixed-scale gesture interaction
for AR applications. In Proceedings of the Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, Montreal, QC, Canada, 21–26 April 2018; pp. 1–6.
29. Hettig, J.; Engelhardt, S.; Hansen, C.; Mistelbauer, G. AR in VR: Assessing surgical augmented reality visualizations in a steerable
virtual reality environment. Int. J. Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surg. 2018, 13, 1717–1725. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
30. Goh, E.S.; Sunar, M.S.; Ismail, A.W. 3D object manipulation techniques in handheld mobile augmented reality interface: A review.
IEEE Access 2019, 7, 40581–40601. [CrossRef]
31. Kollatsch, C.; Klimant, P . Efﬁcient integration process of production data into Augmented Reality based maintenance of machine
tools. Prod. Eng. 2021, 15, 311–319. [CrossRef]
32. Bhattacharyya, P .; Nath, R.; Jo, Y.; Jadhav, K.; Hammer, J. Brick: Toward a model for designing synchronous colocated augmented
reality games. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Glasgow, UK 4–9 May 2019;
pp. 1–9.
33. Kim, K.; Billinghurst, M.; Bruder, G.; Duh, H.B.L.; Welch, G.F. Revisiting trends in augmented reality research: A review of the
2nd decade of ISMAR (2008–2017). IEEE T rans. Vis. Comput. Graph. 2018, 24, 2947–2962. [CrossRef]
34. Liu, H.; Wang, L. An AR-based worker support system for human-robot collaboration. Procedia Manuf. 2017, 11, 22–30. [CrossRef]
35. Cortés-Dávalos, A.; Mendoza, S. Collaborative Web Authoring of 3D Surfaces Using Augmented Reality on Mobile Devices. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2016 IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on Web Intelligence (WI), Omaha, NE, USA, 13–16 October 2016;
pp. 640–643.
36. Qiao, X.; Ren, P .; Dustdar, S.; Liu, L.; Ma, H.; Chen, J. Web AR: A promising future for mobile augmented reality—State of the art,
challenges, and insights. Proc. IEEE 2019, 107, 651–666. [CrossRef]
37. Shukri, S.A.A.; Arshad, H.; Abidin, R.Z. The design guidelines of mobile augmented reality for tourism in Malaysia. In AIP
Conference Proceedings; AIP Publishing LLC: Melville, NY, USA, 2017; Volume 1891, p. 020026.
38. Fallahkhair, S.; Brito, C.A. Design Guidelines for Development of Augmented Reality Application with Mobile and Wearable
Technologies for Contextual Learning. Braz. J. T echnol. Commun. Cogn. Sci. 2019, 7, 1–16.
39. Akçayır, M.; Akçayır, G. Advantages and challenges associated with augmented reality for education: A systematic review of the
literature. Educ. Res. Rev. 2017, 20, 1–11. [CrossRef]
40. da Silva, M.M.; Teixeira, J.M.X.; Cavalcante, P .S.; Teichrieb, V . Perspectives on how to evaluate augmented reality technology
tools for education: A systematic review. J. Braz. Comput. Soc. 2019, 25, 1–18. [CrossRef]
41. Sarkar, P .; Pillai, J.S.; Gupta, A. ScholAR: A collaborative learning experience for rural schools using Augmented Reality
application. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE Tenth International Conference on Technology for Education (T4E), Chennai, India,
10–13 December 2018; pp. 8–15.
42. Soleimani, H.; Jalilifar, A.; Rouhi, A.; Rahmanian, M. Augmented Reality and Virtual Reality Scaffoldings in Improving the
Abstract Genre Structure in a Collaborative Learning Environment: A CALL Study. J. Engl. Lang. T each. Learn. 2019, 11, 327–356.
43. Hadar, E. Toward Development Tools for Augmented Reality Applications—A Practitioner Perspective. In Workshop on Enterprise
and Organizational Modeling and Simulation ; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2018; pp. 91–104.
44. Mukhametshin, S.; Makhmutova, A.; Anikin, I. Sensor tag detection, tracking and recognition for AR application. In Proceedings
of the 2019 International Conference on Industrial Engineering, Applications and Manufacturing (ICIEAM), Tokyo, Japan,
12–15 April 2019; pp. 1–5.

===== PAGE 42 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 42 of 54
45. Santoni, F.; De Angelis, A.; Moschitta, A.; Carbone, P . MagIK: A Hand-Tracking Magnetic Positioning System Based on a
Kinematic Model of the Hand. IEEE T rans. Instrum. Meas. 2021, 70, 1–13. [CrossRef]
46. Frikha, R.; Ejbali, R.; Zaied, M. Handling occlusion in augmented reality surgical training based instrument tracking. In
Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE/ACS 13th International Conference of Computer Systems and Applications (AICCSA), Agadir,
Morocco, 29 November–2 December 2016; pp. 1–5.
47. Wang, M.; Shi, Q.; Song, S.; Meng, M.Q.H. A novel magnetic tracking approach for intrabody objects. IEEE Sensors J. 2020,
20, 4976–4984. [CrossRef]
48. Davis, F.D.; Bagozzi, R.P .; Warshaw, P .R. User acceptance of computer technology: A comparison of two theoretical models.
Manag. Sci. 1989, 35, 982–1003. [CrossRef]
49. Davison, A.J.; Reid, I.D.; Molton, N.D.; Stasse, O. MonoSLAM: Real-time single camera SLAM. IEEE T rans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
Intell. 2007, 29, 1052–1067. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
50. De Smet, J. The Smart Contact Lens: From an Artiﬁcial Iris to a Contact Lens Display. Ph.D. Thesis, Ghent University, Ghent,
Belgium, 2014.
51. Dissanayake, M.G.; Newman, P .; Clark, S.; Durrant-Whyte, H.F.; Csorba, M. A solution to the simultaneous localization and map
building (SLAM) problem. IEEE T rans. Robot. Autom. 2001, 17, 229–241. [CrossRef]
52. Dodgson, N.A. Autostereoscopic 3D displays. Computer 2005, 38, 31–36. [CrossRef]
53. De Smet, J.; Avci, A.; Joshi, P .; Schaubroeck, D.; Cuypers, D.; De Smet, H. Progress toward a liquid crystal contact lens display.
J. Soc. Inf. Disp. 2013, 21, 399–406. [CrossRef]
54. Heidemann, G.; Bax, I.; Bekel, H. Multimodal interaction in an augmented reality scenario. In Proceedings of the 6th International
Conference on Multimodal Interfaces, State College, PA, USA, 13–15 October 2004; pp. 53–60.
55. Chakrabarty, A.; Morris, R.; Bouyssounouse, X.; Hunt, R. Autonomous indoor object tracking with the Parrot AR. Drone. In
Proceedings of the 2016 International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS), Arlington, VA, USA, 7–10 June 2016;
pp. 25–30.
56. Buttner, S.; Sand, O.; Rocker, C. Exploring design opportunities for intelligent worker assistance: A new approach using projetion-
based AR and a novel hand-tracking algorithm. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Ambient Intelligence, Malaga,
Spain, 26–28 April 2017; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2017; pp. 33–45.
57. Gupta, S.; Chaudhary, R.; Gupta, S.; Kaur, A.; Mantri, A. A survey on tracking techniques in augmented reality based ap-
plication. In Proceedings of the 2019 Fifth International Conference on Image Information Processing (ICIIP), Shimla, India,
15–17 November 2019; pp. 215–220.
58. Krishna, V .; Ding, Y.; Xu, A.; Höllerer, T. Multimodal biometric authentication for VR/AR using EEG and eye tracking. In
Proceedings of the Adjunct of the 2019 International Conference on Multimodal Interaction, Suzhou, China, 14–18 October 2019;
pp. 1–5.
59. Dzsotjan, D.; Ludwig-Petsch, K.; Mukhametov, S.; Ishimaru, S.; Kuechemann, S.; Kuhn, J. The Predictive Power of Eye-Tracking
Data in an Interactive AR Learning Environment. In Proceedings of the Adjunct Proceedings of the 2021 ACM International Joint
Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing and Proceedings of the 2021 ACM International Symposium on Wearable
Computers, Virtual, 21–26 September 2021; pp. 467–471.
60. Chen, L.; Cao, C.; De la Torre, F.; Saragih, J.; Xu, C.; Sheikh, Y. High-ﬁdelity Face Tracking for AR/VR via Deep Lighting
Adaptation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Nashville, TN, USA,
20–25 June 2021 pp. 13059–13069.
61. Rambach, J.; Pagani, A.; Schneider, M.; Artemenko, O.; Stricker, D. 6DoF object tracking based on 3D scans for augmented reality
remote live support. Computers 2018, 7, 6. [CrossRef]
62. Ha, T.; Billinghurst, M.; Woo, W. An interactive 3D movement path manipulation method in an augmented reality environment.
Interact. Comput. 2012, 24, 10–24. [CrossRef]
63. Syahidi, A.A.; Tolle, H.; Supianto, A.A.; Arai, K. AR-Child: Analysis, Evaluation, and Effect of Using Augmented Reality as a
Learning Media for Preschool Children. In Proceedings of the 2019 5th International Conference on Computing Engineering and
Design (ICCED), Purwokerto, Indonesia, 5–6 August 2019; pp. 1–6.
64. Wang, X.; Dunston, P .S. User perspectives on mixed reality tabletop visualization for face-to-face collaborative design review.
Autom. Constr. 2008, 17, 399–412. [CrossRef]
65. Wang, X.; Dunston, P .S. Comparative effectiveness of mixed reality-based virtual environments in collaborative design.IEEE
T rans. Syst. Man Cybern. Part C 2011, 41, 284–296. [CrossRef]
66. Hauptmann, A.G. Speech and gestures for graphic image manipulation. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, Austin, TX, USA, 30 April–4 June 1989; pp. 241–245.
67. Heath, C.; Luff, P . Disembodied conduct: Communication through video in a multi-media ofﬁce environment. In Proceedings of
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, New Orleans, LA, USA, 27 April–2 May 1991; pp. 99–103.
68. Rambach, J.; Pagani, A.; Stricker, D. [poster] Augmented things: Enhancing AR applications leveraging the internet of things
and universal 3D object tracking. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality
(ISMAR-Adjunct), Nantes, France, 9–13 October 2017; pp. 103–108.

===== PAGE 43 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 43 of 54
69. Viyanon, W.; Songsuittipong, T.; Piyapaisarn, P .; Sudchid, S. AR furniture: Integrating augmented reality technology to enhance
interior design using marker and markerless tracking. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Intelligent
Information Processing, Bangkok Thailand, 17–18 July 2017; pp. 1–7.
70. Turkan, Y.; Radkowski, R.; Karabulut-Ilgu, A.; Behzadan, A.H.; Chen, A. Mobile augmented reality for teaching structural
analysis. Adv. Eng. Inform. 2017, 34, 90–100. [CrossRef]
71. Dorfmüller, K. Robust tracking for augmented reality using retroreﬂective markers. Comput. Graph. 1999, 23, 795–800. [CrossRef]
72. Danielsson, O.; Holm, M.; Syberfeldt, A. Augmented reality smart glasses for operators in production: Survey of relevant
categories for supporting operators. Procedia CIRP 2020, 93, 1298–1303. [CrossRef]
73. Dörner, R.; Geiger, C.; Haller, M.; Paelke, V . Authoring mixed reality—A component and framework-based approach. In
Entertainment Computing; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2003; pp. 405–413.
74. Drascic, D.; Milgram, P . Positioning accuracy of a virtual stereographic pointer in a real stereoscopic video world. In Proceedings
of the Stereoscopic Displays and Applications II, San Jose, CA, USA, 25–27 February 1991; Volume 1457, pp. 302–313.
75. Drascic, D.; Milgram, P . Perceptual issues in augmented reality. In Proceedings of the Stereoscopic Displays and Virtual Reality
Systems III. International Society for Optics and Photonics, San Jose, CA, USA, 30 January–2 February 1996; Volume 2653,
pp. 123–134.
76. Dünser, A. Supporting low ability readers with interactive augmented reality. Annu. Rev. Cybertherapy T elemed. 2008, 6, 39–46.
77. Dünser, A.; Hornecker, E. Lessons from an AR book study. In Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Tangible and
Embedded Interaction, Baton Rouge, LA, USA, 15–17 February 2007; pp. 179–182.
78. Gibson, L.; Hanson, V .L. Digital motherhood: How does technology help new mothers? In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Paris, France, 27 April–2 May 2013; pp. 313–322.
79. Wuest, H.; Engekle, T.; Wientapper, F.; Schmitt, F.; Keil, J. From CAD to 3D Tracking—Enhancing & Scaling Model-Based
Tracking for Industrial Appliances. In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality
(ISMAR-Adjunct), Merida, Mexico, 19–23 September 2016; pp. 346–347.
80. LaViola, J.J. A discussion of cybersickness in virtual environments. ACM SIGCHI Bull. 2000, 32, 47–56. [CrossRef]
81. Gao, Y.F.; Wang, H.Y.; Bian, X.N. Marker tracking for video-based augmented reality. In Proceedings of the 2016 International
Conference on Machine Learning and Cybernetics (ICMLC), Jeju Island, Republic of Korea, 10–13 July 2016; Volume 2,pp. 928–932.
82. Szalavári, Z.; Eckstein, E.; Gervautz, M. Collaborative gaming in augmented reality. In Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on
Virtual Reality Software and Technology, Taipei, Taiwan, 2–5 November 1998; pp. 195–204.
83. Dolata, M.; Agotai, D.; Schubiger, S.; Schwabe, G. Pen-and-paper rituals in service interaction: Combining high-touch and
high-tech in ﬁnancial advisory encounters. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 2019, 3, 1–24. [CrossRef]
84. Butz, A.; Hollerer, T.; Feiner, S.; MacIntyre, B.; Beshers, C. Enveloping users and computers in a collaborative 3D augmented
reality. In Proceedings of the 2nd IEEE and ACM International Workshop on Augmented Reality (IWAR’99), San Francisco, CA,
USA, 20–21 October 1999; pp. 35–44.
85. Müller, J.; Rädle, R.; Reiterer, H. Remote collaboration with mixed reality displays: How shared virtual landmarks facilitate
spatial referencing. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Denver, CO, USA,
6–11 May 2017; pp. 6481–6486.
86. Gül, L.F. Studying gesture-based interaction on a mobile augmented reality application for co-design activity.J. Multimodal User
Interfaces 2018, 12, 109–124. [CrossRef]
87. Benko, H.; Ishak, E.W.; Feiner, S. Collaborative mixed reality visualization of an archaeological excavation. In Proceedings of
the Third IEEE and ACM International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality, Arlington, VA, USA, 5 November 2004;
pp. 132–140.
88. Franz, J.; Alnusayri, M.; Malloch, J.; Reilly, D. A comparative evaluation of techniques for sharing AR experiences in museums.
Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 2019, 3, 1–20. [CrossRef]
89. An, Z.; Xu, X.; Yang, J.; Liu, Y.; Yan, Y. Research of the three-dimensional tracking and registration method based on multiobjective
constraints in an AR system. Appl. Opt. 2018, 57, 9625–9634. [CrossRef]
90. Oskiper, T.; Samarasekera, S.; Kumar, R. [POSTER] CamSLAM: Vision Aided Inertial Tracking and Mapping Framework for
Large Scale AR Applications. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality
(ISMAR-Adjunct), Nantes, France, 9–13 October 2017; pp. 216–217.
91. Zhang, W.; Han, B.; Hui, P . Jaguar: Low latency mobile augmented reality with ﬂexible tracking. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM
International Conference on Multimedia, Seoul, Republic of Korea, 22–26 October 2018; pp. 355–363.
92. Tokusho, Y.; Feiner, S. Prototyping an outdoor mobile augmented reality street view application. InISMAR Workshop on Outdoor
Mixed and Augmented Reality ; Citeseer: Princeton, NJ, USA, 2009; Volume 2.
93. Henrysson, A.; Ollila, M. UMAR: Ubiquitous mobile augmented reality. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on
Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia, College Park, MD, USA, 27–29 October 2004; pp. 41–45.
94. Henrysson, A.; Ollila, M.; Billinghurst, M. Mobile phone based AR scene assembly. In Proceedings of the 4th International
Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia, Christchurch, New Zealand, 8–10 December 2005; pp. 95–102.
95. Hilliges, O.; Kim, D.; Izadi, S.; Weiss, M.; Wilson, A. HoloDesk: Direct 3d interactions with a situated see-through display. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Austin, TX, USA, 5–10 May 2012;pp. 2421–2430.

===== PAGE 44 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 44 of 54
96. Ar, Y.; Ünal, M.; Sert, S.Y.; Bostanci, E.; Kanwal, N.; Güzel, M.S. Evolutionary Fuzzy Adaptive Motion Models for User Tracking
in Augmented Reality Applications. In Proceedings of the 2018 2nd International Symposium on Multidisciplinary Studies and
Innovative Technologies (ISMSIT), Ankara, Turkey, 19–21 October 2018; pp. 1–6.
97. Ashutosh, K. Hardware Performance Analysis of Mobile-Based Augmented Reality Systems. In Proceedings of the 2020
International Conference on Computational Performance Evaluation (ComPE), Shillong, India, 2–4 July 2020; pp. 671–675.
98. Yang, X.; Fan, X.; Wang, J.; Yin, X.; Qiu, S. Edge-based cover recognition and tracking method for an AR-aided aircraft inspection
system. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. T echnol. 2020, 111, 3505–3518. [CrossRef]
99. Kang, D.; Heo, J.; Kang, B.; Nam, D. Pupil detection and tracking for AR 3D under various circumstances. Electron. Imaging 2019,
2019, 55-1–55-5. [CrossRef]
100. Hu, X.; Hua, H. Design of an optical see-through multi-focal-plane stereoscopic 3d display using freeform prisms. In Frontiers in
Optics; Optical Society of America: Washington, DC, USA, 2012; p. FTh1F–2.
101. Hourcade, J.P . Interaction Design and Children ; Now Publishers Inc.: Delft, The Netherland, 2008.
102. Kang, D.; Ma, L. Real-Time Eye Tracking for Bare and Sunglasses-Wearing Faces for Augmented Reality 3D Head-Up Displays.
IEEE Access 2021, 9, 125508–125522. [CrossRef]
103. Jeong, J.; Lee, C.K.; Lee, B.; Lee, S.; Moon, S.; Sung, G.; Lee, H.S.; Lee, B. Holographically printed freeform mirror array for
augmented reality near-eye display. IEEE Photonics T echnol. Lett. 2020, 32, 991–994. [CrossRef]
104. Park, S.g. Augmented and mixed reality optical see-through combiners based on plastic optics. Inf. Disp. 2021, 37, 6–11.
[CrossRef]
105. Lee, Y.H.; Zhan, T.; Wu, S.T. Prospects and challenges in augmented reality displays.Virtual Real. Intell. Hardw. 2019, 1, 10–20.
[CrossRef]
106. Jang, C.; Mercier, O.; Bang, K.; Li, G.; Zhao, Y.; Lanman, D. Design and fabrication of freeform holographic optical elements.ACM
T rans. Graph. (TOG) 2020, 39, 1–15. [CrossRef]
107. Yu, C.; Peng, Y.; Zhao, Q.; Li, H.; Liu, X. Highly efﬁcient waveguide display with space-variant volume holographic gratings.
Appl. Opt. 2017, 56, 9390–9397. [CrossRef]
108. Gorovyi, I.M.; Sharapov, D.S. Advanced image tracking approach for augmented reality applications. In Proceedings of the 2017
Signal Processing Symposium (SPSympo), Auckland, New Zealand, 27–30 November 2017; pp. 1–5.
109. Hix, D.; Gabbard, J.L.; Swan, J.E.; Livingston, M.A.; Hollerer, T.H.; Julier, S.J.; Baillot, Y.; Brown, D. A cost-effective usability
evaluation progression for novel interactive systems. In Proceedings of the 37th Annual Hawaii International Conference on
System Sciences, Big Island, HI, USA, 5–8 January 2004.
110. Hodges, S.; Williams, L.; Berry, E.; Izadi, S.; Srinivasan, J.; Butler, A.; Smyth, G.; Kapur, N.; Wood, K. SenseCam: A retrospective
memory aid. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing, Seoul, Republic of Korea, 21–24
September 2008; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2006; pp. 177–193.
111. Isham, M.I.M.; Mohamed, F.; Siang, C.V .; Yusoff, Y.A.; Abd Aziz, A.A.; Dewi, D.E.O. A framework of ultrasounds image slice
positioning and orientation in 3D augmented reality environment using hybrid tracking method. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE
Conference on Big Data and Analytics (ICBDA), Seattle, WA, USA, 10–13 December 2018; pp. 105–110.
112. Park, J.H.; Kim, S.B. Optical see-through holographic near-eye-display with eyebox steering and depth of ﬁeld control. Opt.
Express 2018, 26, 27076–27088. [CrossRef]
113. Chakravarthula, P .; Peng, Y.; Kollin, J.; Fuchs, H.; Heide, F. Wirtinger holography for near-eye displays.ACM T rans. Graph. (TOG)
2019, 38, 1–13. [CrossRef]
114. Peng, Y.; Choi, S.; Padmanaban, N.; Wetzstein, G. Neural holography with camera-in-the-loop training. ACM T rans. Graph. (TOG)
2020, 39, 1–14. [CrossRef]
115. Ruan, W.; Yao, L.; Sheng, Q.Z.; Falkner, N.J.; Li, X. Tagtrack: Device-free localization and tracking using passive rﬁd tags. In
Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Systems: Computing, Networking and Services,
London, UK, 2–5 December 2014; pp. 80–89.
116. Ellis, S.R.; Menges, B.M. Studies of the Localization of Virtual Objects in the Near Visual Field. In Fundamentals of Wearable
Computers and Augmented Reality , 1st ed.; CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL, USA, 2001.
117. Evennou, F.; Marx, F. Advanced integration of WiFi and inertial navigation systems for indoor mobile positioning.EURASIP J.
Adv. Signal Process. 2006, 2006, 1–11. [CrossRef]
118. Bach, B.; Sicat, R.; Pﬁster, H.; Quigley, A. Drawing into the AR-CANVAS: Designing embedded visualizations for augmented
reality. In Workshop on Immersive Analytics ; IEEE Vis: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2017.
119. Zeng, H.; He, X.; Pan, H. FunPianoAR: A novel AR application for piano learning considering paired play based on multi-marker
tracking. J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 2019, 1229, 012072. [CrossRef]
120. Rewkowski, N.; State, A.; Fuchs, H. Small Marker Tracking with Low-Cost, Unsynchronized, Movable Consumer Cameras For
Augmented Reality Surgical Training. In Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented
Reality Adjunct (ISMAR-Adjunct), Recife, Brazil, 9–13 November 2020; pp. 90–95.
121. Hoffman, H.G. Physically touching virtual objects using tactile augmentation enhances the realism of virtual environments.
In Proceedings of the IEEE 1998 Virtual Reality Annual International Symposium (Cat. No. 98CB36180), Atlanta, GA, USA,
14–18 March 1998; pp. 59–63.

===== PAGE 45 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 45 of 54
122. Mao, W.; He, J.; Qiu, L. Cat: High-precision acoustic motion tracking. In Proceedings of the 22nd Annual International Conference
on Mobile Computing and Networking, New York, NY, USA, 3–7 October 2016; pp. 69–81.
123. Höllerer, T.; Wither, J.; DiVerdi, S. “Anywhere augmentation”: Towards mobile augmented reality in unprepared environments.
In Location Based Services and T eleCartography; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2007; pp. 393–416.
124. Hong, J. Considering privacy issues in the context of Google glass. Commun. ACM 2013, 56, 10–11. [CrossRef]
125. Hua, H.; Brown, L.D.; Gao, C.; Ahuja, N. A new collaborative infrastructure: SCAPE. In Proceedings of the IEEE Virtual Reality,
2003. Proceedings, Los Angeles, CA, USA, 22–26 March 2003; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2003; pp. 171–179.
126. Huang, Y.; Weng, D.; Liu, Y.; Wang, Y. Key issues of wide-area tracking system for multi-user augmented reality adventure
game. In Proceedings of the 2009 Fifth International Conference on Image and Graphics, Xi’an, China, 20–23 September 2009;
pp. 646–651.
127. Huber, M.; Pustka, D.; Keitler, P .; Echtler, F.; Klinker, G. A system architecture for ubiquitous tracking environments. In
Proceedings of the 2007 6th IEEE and ACM International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality, Nara, Japan,
13–16 November 2007; pp. 211–214.
128. Hugues, O.; Fuchs, P .; Nannipieri, O. New augmented reality taxonomy: Technologies and features of augmented environment.
In Handbook of Augmented Reality ; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2011; pp. 47–63.
129. Inami, M.; Kawakami, N.; Sekiguchi, D.; Yanagida, Y.; Maeda, T.; Tachi, S. Visuo-haptic display using head-mounted projector. In
Proceedings of the Proceedings IEEE Virtual Reality 2000 (Cat. No. 00CB37048), New Brunswick, NJ, USA, 18–22 March 2000;
IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2000; pp. 233–240.
130. Ekman, P .; Friesen, W.V .The Repertoire of Nonverbal Behavior: Categories, Origins, Usage, and Coding ; De Gruyter Mouton: Berlin,
Germany, 2010.
131. Ellis, S.R.; Menges, B.M. Judgments of the distance to nearby virtual objects: Interaction of viewing conditions and accommodative
demand. Presence T eleoperators Virtual Environ.1997, 6, 452–460. [CrossRef]
132. Grubert, J.; Itoh, Y.; Moser, K.; Swan, J.E. A survey of calibration methods for optical see-through head-mounted displays. IEEE
T rans. Vis. Comput. Graph. 2017, 24, 2649–2662. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
133. Moser, K.; Itoh, Y.; Oshima, K.; Swan, J.E.; Klinker, G.; Sandor, C. Subjective evaluation of a semi-automatic optical see-through
head-mounted display calibration technique. IEEE T rans. Vis. Comput. Graph. 2015, 21, 491–500. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
134. Ballestin, G.; Chessa, M.; Solari, F. A registration framework for the comparison of video and optical see-through devices in
interactive augmented reality. IEEE Access 2021, 9, 64828–64843. [CrossRef]
135. Cattari, N.; Cutolo, F.; D’amato, R.; Fontana, U.; Ferrari, V . Toed-in vs parallel displays in video see-through head-mounted
displays for close-up view. IEEE Access 2019, 7, 159698–159711. [CrossRef]
136. Banks, M.S.; Read, J.C.; Allison, R.S.; Watt, S.J. Stereoscopy and the human visual system. SMPTE Motion Imaging J. 2012,
121, 24–43. [CrossRef]
137. Cutolo, F.; Fontana, U.; Ferrari, V . Perspective preserving solution for quasi-orthoscopic video see-through HMDs.T echnologies
2018, 6, 9. [CrossRef]
138. State, A.; Keller, K.P .; Fuchs, H. Simulation-based design and rapid prototyping of a parallax-free, orthoscopic video see-through
head-mounted display. In Proceedings of the Fourth IEEE and ACM International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality
(ISMAR’05), Vienna, Austria, 5–8 October 2005; pp. 28–31.
139. Bottecchia, S.; Cieutat, J.M.; Merlo, C.; Jessel, J.P . A new AR interaction paradigm for collaborative teleassistance system: The
POA. Int. J. Interact. Des. Manuf. (IJIDeM) 2009, 3, 35–40. [CrossRef]
140. Xiong, J.; Hsiang, E.L.; He, Z.; Zhan, T.; Wu, S.T. Augmented reality and virtual reality displays: Emerging technologies and
future perspectives. Light. Sci. Appl. 2021, 10, 1–30. [CrossRef]
141. Do, H.; Kim, Y.M.; Min, S.W. Focus-free head-mounted display based on Maxwellian view using retroreﬂector ﬁlm.Appl. Opt.
2019, 58, 2882–2889. [CrossRef]
142. Song, W.; Cheng, Q.; Surman, P .; Liu, Y.; Zheng, Y.; Lin, Z.; Wang, Y. Design of a light-ﬁeld near-eye display using random
pinholes. Opt. Express 2019, 27, 23763–23774. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
143. Wang, X.; Hua, H. Depth-enhanced head-mounted light ﬁeld displays based on integral imaging.Opt. Lett. 2021, 46, 985–988.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
144. Huang, H.; Hua, H. High-performance integral-imaging-based light ﬁeld augmented reality display using freeform optics. Opt.
Express 2018, 26, 17578–17590. [CrossRef]
145. Kim, S.B.; Park, J.H. Optical see-through Maxwellian near-to-eye display with an enlarged eyebox. Opt. Lett. 2018, 43, 767–770.
[CrossRef]
146. Shrestha, P .K.; Pryn, M.J.; Jia, J.; Chen, J.S.; Fructuoso, H.N.; Boev, A.; Zhang, Q.; Chu, D. Accommodation-free head mounted
display with comfortable 3D perception and an enlarged eye-box. Research 2019, 2019, 9273723. [CrossRef]
147. Lin, T.; Zhan, T.; Zou, J.; Fan, F.; Wu, S.T. Maxwellian near-eye display with an expanded eyebox. Opt. Express 2020, 28,
38616–38625. [CrossRef]
148. Jo, Y.; Yoo, C.; Bang, K.; Lee, B.; Lee, B. Eye-box extended retinal projection type near-eye display with multiple independent
viewpoints. Appl. Opt. 2021, 60, A268–A276. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
149. Xiong, J.; Li, Y.; Li, K.; Wu, S.T. Aberration-free pupil steerable Maxwellian display for augmented reality with cholesteric liquid
crystal holographic lenses. Opt. Lett. 2021, 46, 1760–1763. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

===== PAGE 46 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 46 of 54
150. Ratnam, K.; Konrad, R.; Lanman, D.; Zannoli, M. Retinal image quality in near-eye pupil-steered systems. Opt. Express 2019,
27, 38289–38311. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
151. Jang, C.; Bang, K.; Li, G.; Lee, B. Holographic near-eye display with expanded eye-box. ACM T rans. Graph. (TOG) 2018, 37, 1–14.
[CrossRef]
152. Shi, X.; Liu, J.; Xiao, J.; Han, J. Design of a compact waveguide eyeglass with high efﬁciency by joining freeform surfaces and
volume holographic gratings. JOSA A 2021, 38, A19–A26. [CrossRef]
153. Weng, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Cui, J.; Liu, A.; Shen, Z.; Li, X.; Wang, B. Liquid-crystal-based polarization volume grating applied for
full-color waveguide displays. Opt. Lett. 2018, 43, 5773–5776. [CrossRef]
154. Lee, Y.H.; Tan, G.; Yin, K.; Zhan, T.; Wu, S.T. Compact see-through near-eye display with depth adaption.J. Soc. Inf. Disp. 2018,
26, 64–70. [CrossRef]
155. Yoo, C.; Bang, K.; Chae, M.; Lee, B. Extended-viewing-angle waveguide near-eye display with a polarization-dependent steering
combiner. Opt. Lett. 2020, 45, 2870–2873. [CrossRef]
156. Ghasemi, S.; Otsuki, M.; Milgram, P .; Chellali, R. Use of random dot patterns in achieving x-ray vision for near-ﬁeld applications
of stereoscopic video-based augmented reality displays. Presence 2017, 26, 42–65. [CrossRef]
157. Gabbard, J.L.; Fitch, G.M.; Kim, H. Behind the glass: Driver challenges and opportunities for AR automotive applications. Proc.
IEEE 2014, 102, 124–136. [CrossRef]
158. Kansaku, K.; Hata, N.; Takano, K. My thoughts through a robot’s eyes: An augmented reality-brain–machine interface. Neurosci.
Res. 2010, 66, 219–222. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
159. Kato, H.; Billinghurst, M. Marker tracking and hmd calibration for a video-based augmented reality conferencing system. In
Proceedings of the Proceedings 2nd IEEE and ACM International Workshop on Augmented Reality (IWAR’99), San Francisco,
CA, USA, 20–21 October 1999; pp. 85–94.
160. Azuma, R. Tracking requirements for augmented reality. Commun. ACM 1993, 36, 50–51. [CrossRef]
161. Kato, H.; Billinghurst, M.; Poupyrev, I.; Imamoto, K.; Tachibana, K. Virtual object manipulation on a table-top AR environment. In
Proceedings of the Proceedings IEEE and ACM International Symposium on Augmented Reality (ISAR 2000), Munich, Germany,
5–6 October 2000; pp. 111–119.
162. Ke, Y.; Sukthankar, R. PCA-SIFT: A more distinctive representation for local image descriptors. In Proceedings of the 2004
IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR 2004), Washington, DC, USA,
27 June–2 July 2004; Volume 2.
163. Kerawalla, L.; Luckin, R.; Seljeﬂot, S.; Woolard, A. “Making it real”: Exploring the potential of augmented reality for teaching
primary school science. Virtual Real. 2006, 10, 163–174. [CrossRef]
164. Kijima, R.; Ojika, T. Transition between virtual environment and workstation environment with projective head mounted display.
In Proceedings of the Proceedings of IEEE 1997 Annual International Symposium on Virtual Reality, Albuquerque, NM, USA,
1–5 March 1997; pp. 130–137.
165. Koulieris, G.A.; Ak¸ sit, K.; Stengel, M.; Mantiuk, R.K.; Mania, K.; Richardt, C. Near-eye display and tracking technologies
for virtual and augmented reality. In Computer Graphics Forum ; Wiley Online Library: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2019; Volume 38,
pp. 493–519.
166. Minoufekr, M.; Schug, P .; Zenker, P .; Plapper, P .W. Modelling of CNC Machine Tools for Augmented Reality Assistance
Applications using Microsoft Hololens. In Proceedings of the ICINCO (2), Prague, Czech Republic, 29–31 July 2019; pp. 627–636.
167. Condino, S.; Montemurro, N.; Cattari, N.; D’Amato, R.; Thomale, U.; Ferrari, V .; Cutolo, F. Evaluation of a Wearable AR Platform
for Guiding Complex Craniotomies in Neurosurgery. Ann. Biomed. Eng. 2021, 49, 2590–2605. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
168. Milanovi´ c, V .; Kasturi, A.; Yang, J.; Hu, F. A fast single-pixel laser imager for VR/AR headset tracking. In Proceedings of the
MOEMS and Miniaturized Systems XVI, San Francisco, CA, USA, 30 January–1 February 2017; International Society for Optics
and Photonics: San Diego, CA, USA, 2017; Volume 10116, p. 101160E.
169. Barz, M.; Kapp, S.; Kuhn, J.; Sonntag, D. Automatic Recognition and Augmentation of Attended Objects in Real-time using Eye
Tracking and a Head-mounted Display. In Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on Eye Tracking Research and Applications,
Stuttgart Germany, 25–29 May 2021; pp. 1–4.
170. Evans, G.; Miller, J.; Pena, M.I.; MacAllister, A.; Winer, E. Evaluating the Microsoft HoloLens through an augmented reality
assembly application. In Degraded Environments: Sensing, Processing, and Display ; SPIE: Philadelphia, PA, USA, 2017; Volume
10197, p. 101970V .
171. Fedosov, A.; Niforatos, E.; Elhart, I.; Schneider, T.; Anisimov, D.; Langheinrich, M. Design and evaluation of a wearable AR
system for sharing personalized content on ski resort maps. In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Mobile and
Ubiquitous Multimedia, Rovaniemi, Finland, 12–15 December 2016; pp. 141–152.
172. Reuter, C.; Ludwig, T.; Mischur, P . RescueGlass: Collaborative Applications involving Head-Mounted Displays for Red Cross
Rescue Dog Units. Comput. Support. Coop. Work (CSCW) 2019, 28, 209–246. [CrossRef]
173. Medin, R. Gesture-Driven Interaction in Head-Mounted Display AR: Guidelines for Design within the Context of the Order Picking
Process in Logistic Warehouses. 2018. Available online: http://www.diva-portal.se/smash/get/diva2:1483645/FULLTEXT01.pdf
(accessed on 16 October 2022).
174. Tobias, D. Data Visualisation using Augmented Reality with a Focus set on Head Mounted Displays and Collaborative Tasks. In
Proceedings of the International Symposium on NDT in Aerospace, Dresden, Germany, 24–26 October 2018; Volume 10, pp. 1–9.

===== PAGE 47 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 47 of 54
175. Kim, S.; Suh, Y.; Lee, Y.; Woo, W. Toward ubiquitous VR: When VR meets ubiComp. In Proceedings of the 4th International
Symposium on Ubiquitous VR, 2006; pp. 1–4. Available online: http://icserv.gist.ac.kr/mis/publications/data/2006/ISUVR200
6_SKim.pdf (accessed on 20 October 2022).
176. Andersson, N.; Argyrou, A.; Nägele, F.; Ubis, F.; Campos, U.E.; De Zarate, M.O.; Wilterdink, R. AR-enhanced human-robot-
interaction-methodologies, algorithms, tools. Procedia CIRP 2016, 44, 193–198. [CrossRef]
177. Kiyokawa, K.; Takemura, H.; Yokoya, N. A collaboration support technique by integrating a shared virtual reality and a shared
augmented reality. In Proceedings of the IEEE SMC’99 Conference Proceedings, 1999 IEEE International Conference on Systems,
Man, and Cybernetics (Cat. No. 99CH37028), Tokyo, Japan, 12–15 October 1999; Volume 6, pp. 48–53.
178. Kiyokawa, K.; Takemura, H.; Yokoya, N. SeamlessDesign for 3D object creation. IEEE Multimed. 2000, 7, 22–33. [CrossRef]
179. Klein, G.; Drummond, T. Sensor fusion and occlusion reﬁnement for tablet-based AR. In Proceedings of the Third IEEE and ACM
International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality, Arlington, VA, USA, 5 November 2004; pp. 38–47.
180. Klein, G.; Murray, D.W. Simulating low-cost cameras for augmented reality compositing.IEEE T rans. Vis. Comput. Graph. 2009,
16, 369–380. [CrossRef]
181. Klein, G.; Murray, D. Parallel tracking and mapping for small AR workspaces. In Proceedings of the 2007 6th IEEE and ACM
International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality, Nara, Japan, 13–16 November 2007; pp. 225–234.
182. Kiyokawa, K.; Kurata, Y.; Ohno, H. An optical see-through display for mutual occlusion with a real-time stereovision system.
Comput. Graph. 2001, 25, 765–779. [CrossRef]
183. Chan, L.W.; Kao, H.S.; Chen, M.Y.; Lee, M.S.; Hsu, J.; Hung, Y.P . Touching the void: Direct-touch interaction for intangible
displays. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Atlanta, GA, USA,10–15 April 2010;
pp. 2625–2634.
184. Jang, S.W.; Ko, J.; Lee, H.J.; Kim, Y.S. A Study on Tracking and Augmentation in Mobile AR for e-Leisure.Mob. Inf. Syst. 2018,
2018, 4265352 . [CrossRef]
185. Fang, W.; Zheng, L.; Deng, H.; Zhang, H. Real-time motion tracking for mobile augmented/virtual reality using adaptive
visual-inertial fusion. Sensors 2017, 17, 1037. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
186. Irshad, S.; Awang, D.R.B. A UX Oriented Evaluation approach for Mobile Augmented Reality Applications. In Proceedings of the
16th International Conference on Advances in Mobile Computing and Multimedia, Yogyakarta, Indonesia, 19–21 November 2018;
pp. 108–112.
187. Loizeau, Q.; Danglade, F.; Ababsa, F.; Merienne, F. Methodology for the Field Evaluation of the Impact of Augmented Reality
Tools for Maintenance Workers in the Aeronautic Industry.Front. Virtual Real. 2021, 1, 41. [CrossRef]
188. Kraut, R.E.; Miller, M.D.; Siegel, J. Collaboration in performance of physical tasks: Effects on outcomes and communication. In
Proceedings of the 1996 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, Boston, MA, USA, 16–20 November 1996;
pp. 57–66.
189. Krum, D.M.; Suma, E.A.; Bolas, M. Augmented reality using personal projection and retroreﬂection. Pers. Ubiquitous Comput.
2012, 16, 17–26. [CrossRef]
190. Kutter, O.; Aichert, A.; Bichlmeier, C.; Traub, J.; Heining, S.; Ockert, B.; Euler, E.; Navab, N. Real-time volume rendering for high
quality visualization in augmented reality. In International Workshop on Augmented Environments for Medical Imaging Including
Augmented Reality in Computer-Aided Surgery (AMI-ARCS 2008) ; Citeseer: New York, NY, USA, 2008; pp. 104–113.
191. Kolsch, M.; Bane, R.; Hollerer, T.; Turk, M. Multimodal interaction with a wearable augmented reality system. IEEE Comput.
Graph. Appl. 2006, 26, 62–71. [CrossRef]
192. Kuzuoka, H. Spatial workspace collaboration: A SharedView video support system for remote collaboration capability. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Monterey, CA, USA, 3–7 May 1992;pp. 533–540.
193. Lang, P .; Kusej, A.; Pinz, A.; Brasseur, G. Inertial tracking for mobile augmented reality. In Proceedings of the IMTC/2002.
Proceedings of the 19th IEEE Instrumentation and Measurement Technology Conference (IEEE Cat. No. 00CH37276), Anchorage,
AK, USA, 21–23 May 2002; Volume 2, pp. 1583–1587.
194. LaViola, J. Whole-Hand and Speech Input in Virtual Environments. CS-99-15. Master’s Thesis, Department of Computer Science,
Brown University, Providence, RI, USA, 1999, Unpublished.
195. Lee, G.A.; Kim, G.J.; Billinghurst, M. Interaction design for tangible augmented reality applications. In Emerging T echnologies of
Augmented Reality: Interfaces and Design ; IGI Global: Hershey, PA, USA, 2007; pp. 261–282.
196. Lee, G.A.; Billinghurst, M. A component based framework for mobile outdoor ar applications. In Proceedings of the 12th
ACM SIGGRAPH International Conference on Virtual-Reality Continuum and Its Applications in Industry, Hong Kong, China,
17–19 November 2013; pp. 207–210.
197. Lee, G.A.; Kim, G.J.; Park, C.M. Modeling virtual object behavior within virtual environment. In Proceedings of the ACM
Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology, Hong Kong, China, 11–13 November 2002; pp. 41–48.
198. Lee, G.A.; Billinghurst, M.; Kim, G.J. Occlusion based interaction methods for tangible augmented reality environments. In
Proceedings of the 2004 ACM SIGGRAPH International Conference on Virtual Reality Continuum and Its Applications in
Industry, Singapore, 16–18 June 2004; pp. 419–426.
199. Lee, G.A.; Nelles, C.; Billinghurst, M.; Kim, G.J. Immersive authoring of tangible augmented reality applications. In Proceedings of
the Third IEEE and ACM International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality, Arlington, VA, USA,2–5 November 2004;
pp. 172–181.

===== PAGE 48 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 48 of 54
200. Santos, M.E.C.; Taketomi, T.; Yamamoto, G.; Rodrigo, M.M.T.; Sandor, C.; Kato, H.; et al. Augmented reality as multimedia: The
case for situated vocabulary learning. Res. Pract. T echnol. Enhanc. Learn. 2016, 11, 1–23. [CrossRef]
201. Lee, G.A.; Kim, G.J.; Billinghurst, M. Immersive authoring: What you experience is what you get (wyxiwyg). Commun. ACM
2005, 48, 76–81. [CrossRef]
202. Lee, G.A.; Yang, U.; Son, W. Layered multiple displays for immersive and interactive digital contents. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Entertainment Computing, Cambridge, UK, 20–22 September 2006; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg,
Germany, 2006; pp. 123–134.
203. Lee, G.A.; Kang, H.; Son, W. Mirage: A touch screen based mixed reality interface for space planning applications. In Proceedings
of the 2008 IEEE Virtual Reality Conference, Reno, NV , USA, 8–12 March 2008; pp. 273–274.
204. Lee, G.A.; Yang, U.; Son, W.; Kim, Y.; Jo, D.; Kim, K.H.; Choi, J.S. Virtual reality content-based training for spray painting tasks in
the shipbuilding industry. ETRI J. 2010, 32, 695–703. [CrossRef]
205. Lee, G.A.; Dünser, A.; Kim, S.; Billinghurst, M. CityViewAR: A mobile outdoor AR application for city visualization. In
Proceedings of the 2012 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality-Arts, Media, and Humanities (ISMAR-
AMH), Altanta, GA, USA, 5–8 November 2012; pp. 57–64.
206. Lee, G.A.; Dünser, A.; Nassani, A.; Billinghurst, M. AntarcticAR: An outdoor AR experience of a virtual tour to Antarctica.
In Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality-Arts, Media, and Humanities
(ISMAR-AMH), Adelaide, Australia, 1–4 October 2013; pp. 29–38.
207. Lee, J.Y.; Rhee, G.W.; Seo, D.W. Hand gesture-based tangible interactions for manipulating virtual objects in a mixed reality
environment. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. T echnol. 2010, 51, 1069–1082. [CrossRef]
208. Köse, H.; Güner-Yildiz, N. Augmented reality (AR) as a learning material in special needs education. Educ. Inf. T echnol. 2021,
26, 1921–1936. [CrossRef]
209. Oda, O.; Lister, L.J.; White, S.; Feiner, S. Developing an augmented reality racing game. In Proceedings of the 2nd International
Conference on Intelligent Technologies for interactive enterTAINment, Cancun Mexico, 8–10 January 2008.
210. Schmalstieg, D.; Fuhrmann, A.; Hesina, G.; Szalavári, Z.; Encarnaçao, L.M.; Gervautz, M.; Purgathofer, W. The studierstube
augmented reality project. Presence T eleoperators Virtual Environ.2002, 11, 33–54. [CrossRef]
211. Taehee Lee, T.; Handy, A. Markerless inspection of augmented reality objects using ﬁngertip tracking. In Proceedings of the IEEE
International Symposium on Wearable Computers, Boston, MA, USA, 11–13 October 2007.
212. Lenhardt, A.; Ritter, H. An augmented-reality based brain-computer interface for robot control. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Neural Information Processing, Sydney, NSW, Australia, 22–25 November 2010; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg,
Germany, 2010; pp. 58–65.
213. Fiala, M. Artag revision 1, a ﬁducial marker system using digital techniques. Natl. Res. Counc. Publ. 2004, 47419, 1–47.
214. Renner, R.S.; Velichkovsky, B.M.; Helmert, J.R. The perception of egocentric distances in virtual environments-a review.ACM
Comput. Surv. (CSUR) 2013, 46, 1–40. [CrossRef]
215. Creem-Regehr, S.H.; Stefanucci, J.K.; Thompson, W.B.; Nash, N.; McCardell, M. Egocentric distance perception in the oculus rift
(dk2). In Proceedings of the ACM SIGGRAPH Symposium on Applied Perception, Tübingen, Germany, 13–14 September 2015;
pp. 47–50.
216. Kytö, M.; Mäkinen, A.; Tossavainen, T.; Oittinen, P .T. Stereoscopic depth perception in video see-through augmented reality
within action space. J. Electron. Imaging 2014, 23, 011006. [CrossRef]
217. Rosales, C.S.; Pointon, G.; Adams, H.; Stefanucci, J.; Creem-Regehr, S.; Thompson, W.B.; Bodenheimer, B. Distance judgments
to on-and off-ground objects in augmented reality. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User
Interfaces (VR), Osaka, Japan, 23–27 March 2019; pp. 237–243.
218. Rehman, U.; Cao, S. Augmented-reality-based indoor navigation: A comparative analysis of handheld devices versus google
glass. IEEE T rans. Hum.-Mach. Syst. 2016, 47, 140–151. [CrossRef]
219. Fischler, M.A.; Bolles, R.C. Random sample consensus: A paradigm for model ﬁtting with applications to image analysis and
automated cartography. Commun. ACM 1981, 24, 381–395. [CrossRef]
220. Favalora, G.E. Volumetric 3D displays and application infrastructure. Computer 2005, 38, 37–44. [CrossRef]
221. Feiner, S.; MacIntyre, B.; Haupt, M.; Solomon, E. Windows on the world: 2D windows for 3D augmented reality. In Proceedings
of the 6th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA, 3–5 November 1993;
pp. 145–155.
222. Feiner, S.; MacIntyre, B.; Seligmann, D. Knowledge-based augmented reality. Commun. ACM 1993, 36, 53–62. [CrossRef]
223. Feiner, S.; MacIntyre, B.; Höllerer, T.; Webster, A. A touring machine: Prototyping 3D mobile augmented reality systems for
exploring the urban environment. Pers. T echnol.1997, 1, 208–217. [CrossRef]
224. Fergason, J.L. Optical System for a Head Mounted Display Using a Retro-Reﬂector and Method of Displaying an Image. U.S.
Patent 5,621,572, 15 April 1997.
225. Amin, D.; Govilkar, S. Comparative study of augmented reality SDKs. Int. J. Comput. Sci. Appl. 2015, 5, 11–26.
226. Fisher, R.W. Head-Mounted Projection Display System Featuring Beam Splitter and Method of Making Same. U.S. Patent
5,572,229, 5 November 1996.
227. Lepetit, V .; Fua, P . Keypoint recognition using randomized trees.IEEE T rans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 2006, 28, 1465–1479.
[CrossRef]

===== PAGE 49 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 49 of 54
228. Leutenegger, S.; Chli, M.; Siegwart, R.Y. BRISK: Binary robust invariant scalable keypoints. In Proceedings of the 2011 International
Conference on Computer Vision, Barcelona, Spain, 6–13 November 2011; pp. 2548–2555.
229. Leventon, M.E. A Registration, Tracking, and Visualization System for Image-Guided Surgery. Ph.D. Thesis, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA, 1997.
230. Kyza, E.A.; Georgiou, Y. Digital tools for enriching informal inquiry-based mobile learning: the design of the TraceReaders
location-based augmented reality learning platform. In Proceedings of the 3rd Asia-Europe Symposium on Simulation & Serious
Gaming, Zhuhai, China, 3–4 December 2016; pp. 195–198.
231. Carmigniani, J.; Furht, B.; Anisetti, M.; Ceravolo, P .; Damiani, E.; Ivkovic, M. Augmented reality technologies, systems and
applications. Multimed. T ools Appl. 2011, 51, 341–377. [CrossRef]
232. Lindeman, R.W.; Lee, G.; Beattie, L.; Gamper, H.; Pathinarupothi, R.; Akhilesh, A. GeoBoids: A mobile AR application for
exergaming. In Proceedings of the 2012 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality-Arts, Media, and
Humanities (ISMAR-AMH), Altanta, GA, USA, 5–8 November 2012; pp. 93–94.
233. Lingley, A.R.; Ali, M.; Liao, Y.; Mirjalili, R.; Klonner, M.; Sopanen, M.; Suihkonen, S.; Shen, T.; Otis, B.; Lipsanen, H.; et al. A
single-pixel wireless contact lens display. J. Micromechan. Microeng. 2011, 21, 125014. [CrossRef]
234. Choi, J.; Kim, Y.; Lee, M.; Kim, G.J.; Nam, Y.; Kwon, Y. k-MART: Authoring tool for mixed reality contents. In Proceedings
of the 2010 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality, Seoul, Republic of Korea, 13–16 October 2010;
pp. 219–220.
235. Lindeman, R.W.; Sibert, J.L.; Hahn, J.K. Towards usable VR: An empirical study of user interfaces for immersive virtual
environments. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Pittsburgh, PA, USA,
15–20 May 1999; pp. 64–71.
236. Chong, U.; Alimardanov, S. Audio augmented reality using unity for marine tourism. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Intelligent Human Computer Interaction, Kent, OH, USA, 20–22 December 2021; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg,
Germany, 2021; pp. 303–311.
237. Konopka, B.; Hönemann, K.; Brandt, P .; Wiesche, M. WizARd: A No-Code Tool for Business Process Guidance through the Use of
Augmented Reality. 2022. Available online: https://ceur-ws.org/Vol-3216/paper_258.pdf (accessed on 16 October 2022).
238. Zhao, S.; Wang, L.; Song, J. P-2.8: Research on multi-user interaction design in augmented reality. In SID Symposium Digest of
T echnical Papers; Wiley Online Library: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2022; Volume 53, pp. 651–654.
239. Nebeling, M.; Speicher, M. The trouble with augmented reality/virtual reality authoring tools. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE
International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality Adjunct (ISMAR-Adjunct), Munich, Germany, 16–20 October 2018;
pp. 333–337.
240. Mladenov, B.; Damiani, L.; Giribone, P .; Revetria, R. A short review of the SDKs and wearable devices to be used for ar application
for industrial working environment. In Proceedings of the World Congress on Engineering and Computer Science, San Francisco,
CA, USA, 23–25 October 2018; Volume 1, pp. 23–25.
241. Wells, T.; Houben, S. Collabar–investigating the mediating role of mobile ar interfaces on co-located group collaboration. In
Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Honolulu, HI, USA, 25–30 April 2020;
pp. 1–13.
242. Grandi, J.G. Design of collaborative 3D user interfaces for virtual and augmented reality. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE Virtual
Reality (VR), Venice, Italy, 21–25 May 2017; pp. 419–420.
243. Dong, S.; Behzadan, A.H.; Chen, F.; Kamat, V .R. Collaborative visualization of engineering processes using tabletop augmented
reality. Adv. Eng. Softw. 2013, 55, 45–55. [CrossRef]
244. Kim, J.O.; Kim, J. Augmented Reality Tools for Integrative Science and Arts STEAM Education. Int. J. Pure Appl. Math. 2018, 118.
245. Kazanidis, I.; Tsinakos, A.; Lytridis, C. Teaching mobile programming using augmented reality and collaborative game
based learning. In Proceedings of the Interactive Mobile Communication, Technologies and Learning, Thessalonik ¯e, Greece,
29 November–1 December 2017; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2017; pp. 850–859.
246. Chang, Y.S.; Hu, K.J.; Chiang, C.W.; Lugmayr, A. Applying Mobile Augmented Reality (AR) to teach Interior Design students in
layout plans: Evaluation of learning effectiveness based on the ARCS Model of learning motivation theory. Sensors 2020, 20, 105.
[CrossRef]
247. Sarkar, P .; Kadam, K.; Pillai, J.S. Collaborative approaches to problem-solving on lines and angles using augmented reality. In
Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE Tenth International Conference on Technology for Education (T4E), Goa, India, 9–11 December 2019;
pp. 193–200.
248. Grandi, J.G.; Debarba, H.G.; Bemdt, I.; Nedel, L.; Maciel, A. Design and assessment of a collaborative 3D interaction technique
for handheld augmented reality. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces (VR),
Reutlingen, Germany, 22 March 2018; pp. 49–56.
249. Akçayır, M.; Akçayır, G.; Pekta¸ s, H.M.; Ocak, M.A. Augmented reality in science laboratories: The effects of augmented reality on
university students’ laboratory skills and attitudes toward science laboratories. Comput. Hum. Behav. 2016, 57, 334–342. [CrossRef]
250. Rekimoto, J. Transvision: A hand-held augmented reality system for collaborative design. In Proceeding of International
Conference on Virtual Systems and Multimedia, Gifu, Japan, 18–20 September 1996; Volume 96, pp. 18–20.
251. Oda, O.; Feiner, S. Interference avoidance in multi-user hand-held augmented reality. In Proceedings of the 2009 8th IEEE
International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality, Orlando, FL, USA, 19–22 October 2009; pp. 13–22.

===== PAGE 50 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 50 of 54
252. Huynh, D.N.T.; Raveendran, K.; Xu, Y.; Spreen, K.; MacIntyre, B. Art of defense: A collaborative handheld augmented reality
board game. In Proceedings of the 2009 ACM SIGGRAPH Symposium on Video Games, New Orleans, LA, USA,4–6 August 2009;
pp. 135–142.
253. Nilsson, S.; Johansson, B.; Jonsson, A. Using AR to support cross-organisational collaboration in dynamic tasks. In Proceedings of
the 2009 8th IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality, Orlando, FL, USA, 19–22 October 2009; pp. 3–12.
254. Tseng, P .Y.; Haraldsson, H.; Belongie, S. Annotate All! A Perspective Preserved Asynchronous Annotation System for
Collaborative Augmented Reality. 2019. Available online: https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5c3f69e1cc8fedbc039ea7
39/t/5d0294ab169b78000195c0f1/1560450226075/32_Annotate_all__A_Perspective_Preserved_Asynchronous__Annotation_
System_for_Collaborative_Augmented_Reality.pdf (accessed on 16 October 2022).
255. Kasahara, S.; Heun, V .; Lee, A.S.; Ishii, H. Second surface: Multi-user spatial collaboration system based on augmented reality. In
Proceedings of the SIGGRAPH Asia 2012 Emerging Technologies, Singapore, 28 November–1 December 2012; pp. 1–4.
256. Billinghurst, M.; Bowskill, J.; Morphett, J. WearCom: A wearable communication space. In Proceedings of the CVE, Manchester,
UK, 17–19 June 1998; Volume 98, pp. 123–130.
257. Stafford, A.; Piekarski, W.; Thomas, B.H. Implementation of god-like interaction techniques for supporting collaboration
between outdoor AR and indoor tabletop users. In Proceedings of the 2006 IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Mixed and
Augmented Reality, Santa Barbard, CA, USA, 22–25 October 2006; pp. 165–172.
258. Gauglitz, S.; Nuernberger, B.; Turk, M.; Höllerer, T. In touch with the remote world: Remote collaboration with augmented reality
drawings and virtual navigation. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology,
Edinburgh, UK, 11–13 November 2014; pp. 197–205.
259. Boonbrahm, P .; Kaewrat, C.; Boonbrahm, S. Effective Collaborative Design of Large Virtual 3D Model using Multiple AR Markers.
Procedia Manuf. 2020, 42, 387–392. [CrossRef]
260. Li, X.; Chen, W.; Wu, Y. Distance-driven user interface for collaborative exhibit viewing in augmented reality museum. In
Proceedings of the The Adjunct Publication of the 32nd Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology,
New Orleans, LA, USA, 20–23 October 2019; pp. 42–43.
261. Poretski, L.; Lanir, J.; Arazy, O. Normative tensions in shared augmented reality.Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 2018, 2, 1–22.
[CrossRef]
262. Clergeaud, D.; Roo, J.S.; Hachet, M.; Guitton, P . Towards seamless interaction between physical and virtual locations for
asymmetric collaboration. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology, Gothenburg,
Sweden, 8–10 November 2017; pp. 1–4.
263. Oda, O.; Feiner, S. 3D referencing techniques for physical objects in shared augmented reality. In Proceedings of the 2012 IEEE
International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR), Atlanta, GA, USA, 5–8 November 2012; pp. 207–215.
264. Mahmood, T.; Fulmer, W.; Mungoli, N.; Huang, J.; Lu, A. Improving information sharing and collaborative analysis for remote
geospatial visualization using mixed reality. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented
Reality (ISMAR), Beijing, China, 10–18 October 2019; pp. 236–247.
265. Munoz-Cristóbal, J.A.; Gallego-Lema, V .; Arribas-Cubero, H.F.; Asensio-Pérez, J.I.; Martínez-Monés, A. Game of Blazons: Helping
teachers conduct learning situations that integrate web tools and multiple types of augmented reality. IEEE T rans. Learn. T echnol.
2018, 11, 506–519. [CrossRef]
266. Muñoz-Cristóbal, J.A.; Prieto, L.P .; Asensio-Pérez, J.I.; Jorrín-Abellán, I.M.; Martínez-Monés, A.; Dimitriadis, Y. GLUEPS-AR:
A system for the orchestration of learning situations across spaces using augmented reality. In Proceedings of the European
Conference on Technology Enhanced Learning, Paphos, Cyprus, 17–21 September 2013; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany,
2013; pp. 565–568.
267. bin Hanaﬁ, H.F.; Said, C.S.; Arifﬁn, A.H.; Zainuddin, N.A.; Samsuddin, K. Using a collaborative Mobile Augmented Reality
learning application (CoMARLA) to improve Improve Student Learning. InIOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering ;
IOP Publishing: Bristol, UK, 2016; Volume 160, p. 012111.
268. Dunleavy, M.; Dede, C.; Mitchell, R. Affordances and limitations of immersive participatory augmented reality simulations for
teaching and learning. J. Sci. Educ. T echnol. 2009, 18, 7–22. [CrossRef]
269. Maimone, A.; Fuchs, H. Encumbrance-free telepresence system with real-time 3D capture and display using commodity depth
cameras. In Proceedings of the 2011 10th IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality, Basel, Switzerland,
26–29 October 2011; pp. 137–146.
270. Gauglitz, S.; Nuernberger, B.; Turk, M.; Höllerer, T. World-stabilized annotations and virtual scene navigation for remote
collaboration. In Proceedings of the 27th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, Honolulu, HI,
USA, 5–8 October 2014; pp. 449–459.
271. Guo, A.; Canberk, I.; Murphy, H.; Monroy-Hernández, A.; Vaish, R. Blocks: Collaborative and persistent augmented reality
experiences. Proc. ACM Interact. Mobile Wearable Ubiquitous T echnol. 2019, 3, 83. [CrossRef]
272. Zhang, W.; Han, B.; Hui, P .; Gopalakrishnan, V .; Zavesky, E.; Qian, F. CARS: Collaborative augmented reality for socializa-
tion. In Proceedings of the 19th International Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems & Applications, Tempe, AZ, USA,
12–13 February 2018; pp. 25–30.

===== PAGE 51 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 51 of 54
273. Lien, K.C.; Nuernberger, B.; Höllerer, T.; Turk, M. PPV: Pixel-point-volume segmentation for object referencing in collaborative
augmented reality. In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR), Merida,
Mexico, 19–23 September 2016; pp. 77–83.
274. Huang, W.; Billinghurst, M.; Alem, L.; Kim, S. HandsInTouch: Sharing gestures in remote collaboration. In Proceedings of the
30th Australian Conference on Computer-Human Interaction, Melbourne, Australia, 4–7 December 2018; pp. 396–400.
275. Ou, J.; Fussell, S.R.; Chen, X.; Setlock, L.D.; Yang, J. Gestural communication over video stream: Supporting multimodal
interaction for remote collaborative physical tasks. In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Multimodal Interfaces,
Vancouver, BC, Canada, 5–7 November 2003; pp. 242–249.
276. Datcu, D.; Lukosch, S.G.; Lukosch, H.K. Handheld augmented reality for distributed collaborative crime scene investigation. In
Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Supporting Group Work, Sanibel Island, FL, USA, 13–16 November 2016;
pp. 267–276.
277. Tait, M.; Billinghurst, M. The effect of view independence in a collaborative AR system. Comput. Support. Coop. Work (CSCW)
2015, 24, 563–589. [CrossRef]
278. Fang, D.; Xu, H.; Yang, X.; Bian, M. An augmented reality-based method for remote collaborative real-time assistance: From a
system perspective. Mob. Netw. Appl. 2020, 25, 412–425. [CrossRef]
279. Mora, S.; Boron, A.; Divitini, M. CroMAR: Mobile augmented reality for supporting reﬂection on crowd management. Int. J. Mob.
Hum. Comput. Interact. (IJMHCI) 2012, 4, 88–101. [CrossRef]
280. Adcock, M.; Feng, D.; Thomas, B. Visualization of off-surface 3D viewpoint locations in spatial augmented reality. In Proceedings
of the 1st Symposium on Spatial User Interaction, Los Angeles, CA, USA, 20–21 July 2013; pp. 1–8.
281. Lincoln, P .; Welch, G.; Nashel, A.; Ilie, A.; State, A.; Fuchs, H. Animatronic shader lamps avatars. In Proceedings of the 2009 8th
IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality, Orlando, FL, USA, 19–22 October 2009; pp. 27–33.
282. Komiyama, R.; Miyaki, T.; Rekimoto, J. JackIn space: Designing a seamless transition between ﬁrst and third person view for
effective telepresence collaborations. In Proceedings of the 8th Augmented Human International Conference, Silicon Valley, CA,
USA, 16–18 March 2017; pp. 1–9.
283. Lehment, N.H.; Merget, D.; Rigoll, G. Creating automatically aligned consensus realities for AR videoconferencing. In Proceedings
of the 2014 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR), Munich, Germany, 10–12 September 2014;
pp. 201–206.
284. Oda, O.; Elvezio, C.; Sukan, M.; Feiner, S.; Tversky, B. Virtual replicas for remote assistance in virtual and augmented re-
ality. In Proceedings of the 28th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software & Technology, Charlotte, NC, USA,
11–15 November 2015; pp. 405–415.
285. Piumsomboon, T.; Lee, G.A.; Hart, J.D.; Ens, B.; Lindeman, R.W.; Thomas, B.H.; Billinghurst, M. Mini-me: An adaptive avatar
for mixed reality remote collaboration. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
Montreal, QC, Canada, 21–26 April 2018; pp. 1–13.
286. Piumsomboon, T.; Lee, Y.; Lee, G.; Billinghurst, M. CoVAR: A collaborative virtual and augmented reality system for remote
collaboration. In Proceedings of the SIGGRAPH Asia 2017 Emerging Technologies, Bangkok, Thailand, 27–30 November 2017;
pp. 1–2.
287. Teo, T.; Lee, G.A.; Billinghurst, M.; Adcock, M. Hand gestures and visual annotation in live 360 panorama-based mixed reality
remote collaboration. In Proceedings of the 30th Australian Conference on Computer-Human Interaction, Melbourne, Australia,
4–7 December 2018; pp. 406–410.
288. Thanyadit, S.; Punpongsanon, P .; Pong, T.C. ObserVAR: Visualization system for observing virtual reality users using augmented
reality. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR), Beijing, China,
10–18 October 2019; pp. 258–268.
289. Sodhi, R.S.; Jones, B.R.; Forsyth, D.; Bailey, B.P .; Maciocci, G. BeThere: 3D mobile collaboration with spatial input. In Proceedings
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Paris, France, 27 April–2 May 2013; pp. 179–188.
290. Ong, S.; Shen, Y. A mixed reality environment for collaborative product design and development. CIRP Ann. 2009, 58, 139–142.
[CrossRef]
291. Irlitti, A.; Smith, R.T.; Von Itzstein, S.; Billinghurst, M.; Thomas, B.H. Challenges for asynchronous collaboration in augmented
reality. In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR-Adjunct), Merida,
Mexico, 19–23 September 2016; pp. 31–35.
292. Azuma, R.; Baillot, Y.; Behringer, R.; Feiner, S.; Julier, S.; MacIntyre, B. Recent advances in augmented reality.IEEE Comput. Graph.
Appl. 2001, 21, 34–47. [CrossRef]
293. Baecker, R.M. Readings in Groupware and Computer-Supported Cooperative Work: Assisting Human-Human Collaboration ; Morgan
Kaufmann: Burlington, MA, USA, 1993.
294. Akussah, M.; Dehinbo, J. Developing a Marker-based Handheld Augmented Reality Application for Learning Mathematics. In
EdMedia+ Innovate Learning; Association for the Advancement of Computing in Education (AACE): Chesapeake, VA, USA, 2018;
pp. 856–866.
295. Roberto, R.; Lima, J.P .; Araújo, T.; Teichrieb, V . Evaluation of motion tracking and depth sensing accuracy of the tango tablet. In
Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR-Adjunct), Merida, Mexico,
19–23 September 2016; pp. 231–234.

===== PAGE 52 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 52 of 54
296. Maimone, A.; Fuchs, H. Computational augmented reality eyeglasses. In Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE International Symposium
on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR), Adelaide, Australia, 1–4 October 2013; pp. 29–38.
297. Mair, E.; Hager, G.D.; Burschka, D.; Suppa, M.; Hirzinger, G. Adaptive and generic corner detection based on the accelerated
segment test. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision, Heraklion, Crete, Greece, 5–11 September 2010;
Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2010; pp. 183–196.
298. Mandeville, J. A shared virtual environment for architectural design review. In Proceedings of the CVE’96 Workshop Proceedings,
Nottingham, UK, 19–20 September 1996.
299. Fernández-Caramés, T.M.; Fraga-Lamas, P . Towards the Internet of smart clothing: A review on IoT wearables and garments for
creating intelligent connected e-textiles. Electronics 2018, 7, 405. [CrossRef]
300. Martínez, H.; Skournetou, D.; Hyppölä, J.; Laukkanen, S.; Heikkilä, A. Drivers and bottlenecks in the adoption of augmented
reality applications. J. Multimed. Theory Appl. 2014, 2. [CrossRef]
301. Chessa, M.; Maiello, G.; Klein, L.K.; Paulun, V .C.; Solari, F. Grasping objects in immersive Virtual Reality. In Proceedings of the
2019 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces (VR), Osaka, Japan, 23–27 March 2019; pp. 1749–1754. [CrossRef]
302. Han, D.T.; Suhail, M.; Ragan, E.D. Evaluating Remapped Physical Reach for Hand Interactions with Passive Haptics in Virtual
Reality. IEEE T rans. Vis. Comput. Graph. 2018, 24, 1467–1476. [CrossRef]
303. Fotouhi, J. Augmented Reality and Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Image-Guided and Robot-Assisted Interventions. Ph.D. Thesis, The
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA, 2020.
304. Wang, Z.; Bai, X.; Zhang, S.; Billinghurst, M.; He, W.; Wang, Y.; Han, D.; Chen, G.; Li, J. The role of user-centered AR instruction in
improving novice spatial cognition in a high-precision procedural task. Adv. Eng. Inform. 2021, 47, 101250. [CrossRef]
305. Newman, J.; Wagner, M.; Bauer, M.; MacWilliams, A.; Pintaric, T.; Beyer, D.; Pustka, D.; Strasser, F.; Schmalstieg, D.; Klinker, G.
Ubiquitous tracking for augmented reality. In Proceedings of the Third IEEE and ACM International Symposium on Mixed and
Augmented Reality, Washington, DC, USA, 2–5 November 2004; pp. 192–201.
306. Newman, J.; Schall, G.; Barakonyi, I.; Schürzinger, A.; Schmalstieg, D. Wide-Area Tracking Tools for Augmented Reality. 2006.
Available online: http://www.barakonyi.net/papers/ubisense_demo_pervasive06.pdf (accessed on 20 October 2022).
307. Nilsen, T.; Looser, J. Tankwar-Tabletop war gaming in augmented reality. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on
Pervasive Gaming Applications, Munich, Germany, 8–13 May 2005; Volume 5.
308. Nilsson, S.; Johansson, B. Acceptance of augmented reality instructions in a real work setting. In Proceedings of the CHI’08
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Florence, Italy, 5–10 April 2008; pp. 2025–2032.
309. O’Conaill, B. Characterizing, predicting and measuring video-mediated communication: A conversational approach. In Video-
Mediated Communication; L. Erlbaum Associates: Hillsdale, NJ, USA, 1997.
310. Song, E.; Suaib, N.M.; Sihes, A.J.; Alwee, R.; Yunos, Z.M. Design and development of learning mathematics game for primary
school using handheld augmented reality. Iop Conf. Ser. Mater. Sci. Eng. 2020, 979, 012014. [CrossRef]
311. Oh, Y.; Woo, W. A uniﬁed application service model for ubihome by exploiting intelligent context-awareness. InInternational
Symposium on Ubiquitious Computing Systems ; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2004; pp. 192–202.
312. Oh, Y.; Shin, C.; Jung, W.; Woo, W. The ubiTV application for a Family in ubiHome. In Proceedings of the 2nd Ubiquitous Home
Workshop, 2005; pp. 23–32. Available online: https://www.researchgate.net/proﬁle/Woontack-Woo/publication/228358612_
The_ubiTV_application_for_a_Family_in_ubiHome/links/0fcfd50b7fffbc955a000000/The-ubiTV-application-for-a-Family-in-
ubiHome.pdf (accessed on 20 October 2022).
313. Ohshima, T.; Satoh, K.; Yamamoto, H.; Tamura, H. Ar2 hockey: A case study of collaborative augmented reality. In Proceedings
of the VRAIS’98: Proceedings of the Virtual Reality Annual International Symposium, Atlanta, GA, USA, 14–18 March 1998; IEEE
Computer Society: Washington, DC, USA, 1998.
314. Olsson, T.; Lagerstam, E.; Kärkkäinen, T.; Väänänen-Vainio-Mattila, K. Expected user experience of mobile augmented reality
services: A user study in the context of shopping centres. Pers. Ubiquitous Comput. 2013, 17, 287–304. [CrossRef]
315. Ozuysal, M.; Calonder, M.; Lepetit, V .; Fua, P . Fast keypoint recognition using random ferns.IEEE T rans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
Intell. 2009, 32, 448–461. [CrossRef]
316. Pandey, J.; Liao, Y.T.; Lingley, A.; Mirjalili, R.; Parviz, B.; Otis, B.P . A fully integrated RF-powered contact lens with a single
element display. IEEE T rans. Biomed. Circuits Syst. 2010, 4, 454–461. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
317. Botha-Ravyse, C.; Lähtevänoja, A.; Luimula, M. Collaborative AR application design for early childhood education. In Proceedings
of the EdMedia+ Innovate Learning. Association for the Advancement of Computing in Education (AACE), Amsterdam, The
Netherlands, 24–28 June 2019; pp. 18–27.
318. Parviz, B.A. For your eye only. IEEE Spectr. 2009, 46, 36–41. [CrossRef]
319. Jana, S.; Molnar, D.; Moshchuk, A.; Dunn, A.; Livshits, B.; Wang, H.J.; Ofek, E. Enabling Fine-Grained Permissions for Aug-
mented Reality Applications with Recognizers. In Proceedings of the 22nd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 13,
Washington, DC, USA, 14–16 August 2013; pp. 415–430.
320. Ruth, K.; Kohno, T.; Roesner, F. Secure Multi-User Content Sharing for Augmented Reality Applications. In Proceedings of the
28th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 19), Santa Clara, CA, USA, 14–16 August 2019; pp. 141–158.

===== PAGE 53 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 53 of 54
321. Pierdicca, R.; Prist, M.; Monteriù, A.; Frontoni, E.; Ciarapica, F.; Bevilacqua, M.; Mazzuto, G. Augmented reality smart glasses in
the workplace: Safety and security in the fourth industrial revolution era. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Augmented Reality, Virtual Reality and Computer Graphics, Lecce, Italy, 7–10 September 2020; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg,
Germany, 2020; pp. 231–247.
322. Ahn, S.; Gorlatova, M.; Naghizadeh, P .; Chiang, M.; Mittal, P . Adaptive fog-based output security for augmented reality.
In Proceedings of the 2018 Morning Workshop on Virtual Reality and Augmented Reality Network, Budapest, Hungary,
24 August 2018; pp. 1–6.
323. Chen, S.; Li, Z.; Dangelo, F.; Gao, C.; Fu, X. A case study of security and privacy threats from augmented reality (ar). In
Proceedings of the 2018 International Conference on Computing, Networking and Communications (ICNC), Maui, HI, USA,
5–8 March 2018; pp. 442–446.
324. Langﬁnger, M.; Schneider, M.; Stricker, D.; Schotten, H.D. Addressing security challenges in industrial augmented reality
systems. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE 15th International Conference on Industrial Informatics (INDIN), Emden, Germany,
24–26 July 2017; pp. 299–304.
325. Roesner, F.; Kohno, T.; Molnar, D. Security and privacy for augmented reality systems.Commun. ACM 2014, 57, 88–96. [CrossRef]
326. Wazir, W.; Khattak, H.A.; Almogren, A.; Khan, M.A.; Din, I.U. Doodle-based authentication technique using augmented reality.
IEEE Access 2020, 8, 4022–4034. [CrossRef]
327. Lebeck, K.; Ruth, K.; Kohno, T.; Roesner, F. Securing augmented reality output. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE Symposium on
Security and Privacy (SP), San Jose, CA, USA, 25 May 2017; pp. 320–337.
328. Zhang, X.; Slavin, R.; Wang, X.; Niu, J. Privacy assurance for android augmented reality apps. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE
24th Paciﬁc Rim International Symposium on Dependable Computing (PRDC), Kyoto, Japan, 1–3 December 2019; pp. 114–1141.
329. McPherson, R.; Jana, S.; Shmatikov, V . No escape from reality: Security and privacy of augmented reality browsers. In Proceedings
of the 24th International Conference on World Wide Web, Florence, Italy, 18–22 May 2015; pp. 743–753.
330. Roesner, F.; Kohno, T. Security and Privacy for Augmented Reality: Our 10-Year Retrospective. In Proceedings of the VR4Sec: 1st
International Workshop on Security for XR and XR for Security, Online, 6 August 2021.
331. Lebeck, K.; Ruth, K.; Kohno, T.; Roesner, F. Towards security and privacy for multi-user augmented reality: Foundations with
end users. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), San Francisco, CA, USA, 20–24 May 2018;
pp. 392–408.
332. Dissanayake, V .D.A Review of Cyber Security Risks in an Augmented Reality World ; University of Sri Lanka, Institute of Information
Technology: Malabe, Sri Lanka, 2019.
333. Lebeck, K. Security and Privacy for Emerging Augmented Reality Technologies. Ph.D. Thesis, University of Washington, Seattle,
WA, USA, 2019.
334. Marques, B.; Silva, S.; Alves, J.; Rocha, A.; Dias, P .; Santos, B.S. Remote collaboration in maintenance contexts using augmented
reality: Insights from a participatory process. Int. J. Interact. Des. Manuf. 2022, 16, 419–438. [CrossRef]
335. Kang, J.Y.M.; Kim, J.E.; Lee, J.Y.; Lin, S.H. How mobile augmented reality digitally transforms the retail sector: examining trust in
augmented reality apps and online/ofﬂine store patronage intention. J. Fash. Mark. Manag. Int. J. 2022. [CrossRef]
336. Alimamy, S.; Gnoth, J. I want it my way! The effect of perceptions of personalization through augmented reality and online
shopping on customer intentions to co-create value. Comput. Hum. Behav. 2022, 128, 107105. [CrossRef]
337. Ghafoori, M.; Shadnoosh, N.; Karamati, M.A. The effect of co-creation in the face of augmented reality on perceived risk, perceived
trust. J. Invest. Knowl. 2022, 11, 551–575.
338. Butt, G.Q.; Sayed, T.A.; Riaz, R.; Rizvi, S.S.; Paul, A. Secure Healthcare Record Sharing Mechanism with Blockchain. Appl. Sci.
2022, 12, 2307. [CrossRef]
339. Djenouri, Y.; Belhadi, A.; Srivastava, G.; Lin, J.C.W. Secure collaborative augmented reality framework for biomedical informatics.
IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform. 2021, 26, 2417–2424. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
340. Lukosch, S.; Lukosch, H.; Datcu, D.; Cidota, M. On the spot information in augmented reality for teams in the security domain. In
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Seoul, Republic
of Korea, 18–23 April 2015; pp. 983–988.
341. Althewaynee, H.B.; Hamood, M.M.; Hussein, H.A. A systematic review of using augmented reality in tourism between 2017 and
2021. Res. J. Anal. Invent. 2022, 3, 18–45.
342. Ali, T.; Alam, M.; Nauman, M.; Ali, T.; Ali, M.; Anwar, S. A scalable and privacy preserving remote attestation mechanism.Inf.-Int.
Interdiscip. J. 2011, 14, 1193–1203.
343. Syed, T.A.; Jan, S.; Musa, S.; Ali, J. Providing efﬁcient, scalable and privacy preserved veriﬁcation mechanism in remote attestation.
In Proceedings of the 2016 International Conference on Information and Communication Technology (ICICTM), Bangkok,
Thailand, 16–18 December 2016; pp. 236–245.
344. Siddiqui, M.S.; Syed, T.A.; Nadeem, A.; Nawaz, W.; Alkhodre, A. Virtual Tourism and Digital Heritage: An Analysis of VR/AR
Technologies and Applications. Int. J. Adv. Comput. Sci. Appl. 2022, 13, 303–315. [CrossRef]

===== PAGE 54 =====

Sensors 2023, 23, 146 54 of 54
345. Tola, E.; Lepetit, V .; Fua, P . Daisy: An efﬁcient dense descriptor applied to wide-baseline stereo.IEEE T rans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
Intell. 2009, 32, 815–830. [CrossRef]
346. Träskbäack, M.; Haller, M. Mixed reality training application for an oil reﬁnery: User requirements. In Proceedings of the
2004 ACM SIGGRAPH International Conference on Virtual Reality Continuum and Its Applications in Industry, Singapore,
16–18 June 2004; pp. 324–327.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.