

===== PAGE 1 =====

10262 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 24, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2023
Transportation 5.0: The DAO to Safe, Secure, and
Sustainable Intelligent Transportation Systems
Fei-Yue Wang
 , Fellow, IEEE, Yilun Lin
 , Member, IEEE, Petros A. Ioannou
 , Life Fellow, IEEE,
Ljubo Vlacic
 , Life Senior Member, IEEE , Xiaoming Liu, Azim Eskandarian, Senior Member, IEEE,
Yisheng Lv
 , Senior Member, IEEE, Xiaoxiang Na
 , Member, IEEE, David Cebon
 , Member, IEEE,
Jiaqi Ma
 , Member, IEEE, Lingxi Li
 , Senior Member, IEEE, and Cristina Olaverri-Monreal
Abstract— In 2014, IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems
Society established a Technical Committee on Transportation 5.0
with the mission of promoting and transforming the deployment
of advanced and innovative technologies, especially Artificial
Intelligence in transportation. This paper briefly summarizes our
main research and findings over the last decade. Transporta-
tion Foundation Models, Transportation Scenarios Engineering,
and Transportation Operating Systems have been identified
as the main directions for the research and development of
next-generation intelligent transportation systems.
Index Terms— Intelligent transportation systems, cyber-
physical-social systems, parallel intelligence, knowledge automa-
tion, DAOs, transportation 5.0.
Manuscript received 13 June 2023; revised 24 July 2023; accepted 9 August
2023. Date of publication 11 September 2023; date of current version
4 October 2023. This work was supported in part by the Project “A Uni-
fied Approach for Transport Automation and Vehicle Intelligence: Parallel
Driving,” funded by the Intel Collaborative Research Institute for Intelligent
and Automated Connected Vehicles (ICRI-IACV); and in part by the Science
and Technology Development Fund, Macau, SAR, under Grant 0050/2020/A1.
The Associate Editor for this article was Y . Wang. (Corresponding author:
Fei-Yue Wang.)
Fei-Yue Wang is with the State Key Laboratory for Management and Control
of Complex Systems, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China,
and also with the Macau Institute of Systems Engineering, Macau University
of Science and Technology, Macau, China (e-mail: feiyue.wang@ia.ac.cn).
Yilun Lin is with the Urban Computing Laboratory and the Shanghai
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai 200232, China (e-mail: linyilun@
pjlab.org.cn).
Petros A. Ioannou is with the Department of Electrical Engineering-Systems,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90007 USA (e-mail:
ioannou@usc.edu).
Ljubo Vlacic is with the Institute of Intelligent and Integrated Systems and
the School of Engineering and Built Environment, Griffith University, Nathan,
QLD 4111, Australia (e-mail: l.vlacic@griffith.edu.au).
Xiaoming Liu is with the College of Metropolitan Transporta-
tion, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing 100081, China (e-mail:
liuxm@bjut.edu.cn).
Azim Eskandarian is with the Department of Mechanical Engineering,
Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, V A 24061 USA (e-mail: eskandarian@vt.edu).
Yisheng Lv is with the Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing 100045, China (e-mail: yisheng.lv@ia.ac.cn).
Xiaoxiang Na and David Cebon are with the Department of Engi-
neering, University of Cambridge, CB2 1TN Cambridge, U.K. (e-mail:
xnhn2@eng.cam.ac.uk; dc@eng.cam.ac.uk).
Jiaqi Ma is with the Samueli School of Engineering, University of Califor-
nia, Los Angeles, CA 90095 USA (e-mail: jiaqima@ucla.edu).
Lingxi Li is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Purdue School of Engineering and Technology, Indiana University–Purdue
University Indianapolis (IUPUI), Indianapolis, IN 46202 USA (e-mail:
ll7@iupui.edu).
Cristina Olaverri-Monreal is with the Department of Intelligent Trans-
portation Systems, Johannes Kepler Universität, 4040 Linz, Austria (e-mail:
cristina.olaverri-monreal@jku.at).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TITS.2023.3305380
I. T RANSPORTATION : A S OCIO -TECHNICAL SYSTEM
T
HE
relationship between Intelligent Transportation Sys-
tems (ITS) and human societies is multifaceted, encom-
passing social morphology, transportation system design, and
social behavior, all of which are interdependent and influence
one another. Society plays an equal or even more signifi-
cant role than transportation technologies in the development
and evolution of ITS [1], [2]. In established facilities, such
as intelligent surveillance and traffic light control, ITS has
utilized societal and transportation-related human factors as
contextual inputs, leading to a reactive response. The neglect
of societal perspectives in previous studies was not due to a
lack of recognition of their importance, but rather because
of the tremendous complexity involved in accounting for
social interactions. However, with the emergence of the Intel-
ligent Technology Era (the New IT Era), the situation has
changed.
A recent methodology known as Transportation 5.0 has
been proposed with a Cyber Physical Social Systems (CPSS)
architecture [3]. Inspired by Karl Popper’s theory of real-
ity [4], CPSS refers to the integration and coordination of
three elements: computational (or cyber) resources, physical
resources, and human or social traits [3], [5]. It emphasizes the
deep integration of social and human dimensions into Cyber
Physical Systems (CPS), establishing a new space with the
same status as cyber and physical spaces, rather than being
confined as a mere backdrop or context.
Decentralized Autonomous Organizations and Operations
(DAO2) have opened up a new world with new social norms
and production relationships. Interestingly, the well-known
ancient Chinese philosopher Lao Tzu (6th-4th century BC)
started his classic Tao Teh Ching with six Chinese characters:
“
(Dao)
 (Ke)
 (Dao)
 (Fei)
 (Chang)
 (Dao)”, Dao
means journey or road in Chinese, inspires the incorporation
of social factors in transportation systems [6]. By incorporating
DAO into CPS, Transportation 5.0 is capable of treating
society as an active entity, proactively interacting with society
in ITS processes by leveraging advancements in Artificial
Intelligence (AI), large-scale communication and computing,
and data technologies.
From the perspective of social operation and urban develop-
ment, the transportation system encompasses all the systems
that facilitate the movement of people and goods within a city.
1558-0016 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 11:37:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 2 =====

W ANG et al.: TRANSPORTATION 5.0: THE DAO TO SAFE, SECURE, AND SUSTAINABLE ITS 10263
The level of urban development is highly reflected in the
quality of a city’s transportation system. Likewise, the trans-
portation system significantly impacts the regional economic
structure and urban morphology [7]. The limited capacity
and functionality of transportation systems can constrain the
growth potential of cities.
Although ITS technologies have experienced significant
attention and growth, optimizing a transportation system
necessitates more than just technological advancements.
In fact, new technologies may introduce additional complex-
ities to existing systems, which may lead to inefficiencies
and degraded performance if not properly designed and opti-
mized. The current transportation system is a collection of
many uncoordinated subsystems each of which is trying to
optimize its performance without caring about the overall
system performance leading to well-known phenomenon of
Price of Anarchy [8] where subsystem optimality does not
imply system optimality and vice versa. The development of
personal transportation, for example, runs counter to the need
for social welfare due to the high consumption of roadway
resources that results from the increasing demand for personal
transportation [9], [10]. As a result, past transportation plan-
ning objectives, which focused on ensuring efficient private
transportation in decades, have led to severe environmental
pollution and traffic congestion [11].
Several everyday occurrences emphasize the significance
of taking a societal perspective into account when designing
transportation systems. For instance, social activities have
become a primary purpose of trips for many people. Despite
the COVID pandemic, the proportion of trips involving visiting
friends and dining out went up from 48.6% in 2018 to 52.6%
in 2020 in Beijing [12], [13]. In line with this, in light of
the global COVID-19 pandemic, the importance of having
a dependable and trackable logistics network became more
critical than ever before [14].
Studies demonstrate the crucial role that humans played
in all technological fields [15], particularly in fields where
ITS has a significant impact, such as vehicle technologies
and level of automation, traveler information management,
fleet planning, and traffic management control. Societal per-
spectives should be prioritized early in the ITS testing phase
to introduce a new ITS paradigm. The results of testing
could lead to wider acceptance of the new ITS paradigm by
the public. The increased acceptance of ITS could result in
the improvement of its morphology, leading to a cycle of
enhanced public awareness and continuous support of ITS
developments. For example, the adoption of new technologies
such as autonomous vehicles will depend on the public’s
trust in the technology [16]. Even if the introduction of these
vehicles into urban environments is expected to be gradual, the
actions of the road users and their reactions to the vehicles
need to be investigated to understand the mechanisms to
establish such trust [17].
During the 17th IEEE International Intelligent Transporta-
tion Systems Conference (ITSC) held in Qingdao, China,
in 2014, the Technical Committee on Transportation 5.0 was
established by the IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems
Society (ITSS). Since then, IEEE ITSC has regularly organized
workshops on Transportation 5.0 and published a number of
technical reports [18], [19] and papers on topics of X 5.0 and
Parallel Intelligence [20], [21], [22], [23], [24], [25], [26], [27],
[28], [29], [30], [31], [32]. This position paper serves as a
brief summary of these extensive activities and research over
the past decade.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: in
Section II, we review the history of transportation systems
through the lens of socio-technical systems. In Sections III
and IV, we highlight the challenges brought about by recent
social changes and the cornerstone technologies that could
solve them. Section V then demonstrates best practices and
upcoming ITS applications. Section VI concludes the paper.
II. A B RIEF HISTORY OF TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS
A. Socio-Technical Transition
Socio-technical systems (STS) refer to systematic arrange-
ments that comprise cybernetic processes, technical objects,
and human relationships. These intricate infrastructures are
composed of social and technological factors that interact
in a cause-and-effect mechanism and in an unpredictable
manner as well. STS incorporates the four critical elements:
humans, nature, artifacts, and organizations. Humans interact
with nature, which results in the creation of artifacts, which
in turn contribute to the formation of organizations [33], [34].
Transportation can be classified as a typical example of
STS. In this system, humans mainly interact with physical
space and raw materials, which gives rise to human-made
objects like roads and vehicles. During this process, humans
not only construct the transportation instruments but also
organize the operations involved, such as logistics and pub-
lic transport services, which constitute an organizational
action [35].
Previous research showed that the unilateral optimization of
society or technology tends to increase the number of unpre-
dictable, “non-designed” relationships and those relationships
that are detrimental to the system’s performance [36], [37].
Thus, the socio-technical theory is about joint optimization or
designing social and technological systems to work together
smoothly [38].
However, joint optimization is often difficult to achieve
in socio-technical systems, because the optimization pro-
cess depends on synchronized changes in both technological
development and social awareness. When technological devel-
opment exceeds the rate of change in social awareness, such
development is often suppressed. Similarly, when social aware-
ness exceeds the level of technological development, such
social awareness is often limited to a small scope. Therefore,
for complex systems such as transportation, it is necessary
to use a socio-technical systems perspective to study them.
This is the only way we can understand how to choose
the appropriate path to adapt to the development of social
awareness.
B. Evolution of Transportation Systems
By using the lens of socio-technical paradigm shifts, we can
gain a deeper understanding of travel as a fundamental human
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 11:37:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 3 =====

10264 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 24, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2023
need and divide the evolution of the transportation system
into four phases. These four phases reflect the general pattern
of socio-technical systems development, whereby advances in
tools and technologies first bring about changes in societal
forms, which in turn, begin to guide technological change in
a reverse direction.
Transportation 1.0: Transformation of the natural envi-
ronment. The emergence of cities and nations led to the
emergence of transportation systems. When the scope of
human and commodity activities expanded beyond traditional
tribal societies, the development of new transportation methods
and the construction of transportation infrastructure became a
fundamental requirement for the development of cities and
nations [39]. The country’s road networks, such as the road
network of Rome, the Qin Zhi Dao of China, and the Persian
Royal Road, have been constructed, allowing the natural envi-
ronment to support primitive transportation. More importantly,
travel as a social phenomenon became familiar to humans, and
the regions connected by the transportation system became
essential to national identity.
Transportation 2.0: Proliferation of transportation
means. As familiarity with travel grew, the evolution of travel
methods became a significant aspect of the 2.0 era. This
development was initially driven by the ruling class, which
resulted in the creation of primitive modes of transportation
such as saddles, carriages, and sailing ships [40]. With the
advent of the industrial revolution, modern tools such as
automobiles, trains, and ships were created. The introduction
of the Ford assembly line marked the peak of the second
industrial revolution, as well as the Transportation 2.0 era.
Since then, millions of people have had access to their own
cars, and travel, a privilege in the 1.0 era. With the advent
of the automobile age, it has become impossible to conceive
of a society without vehicles for travel. The transportation
system has become both a spatial foundation and an essential
component of the modern city [41], [42].
Transportation 3.0: Organizing the mobilities. With
the ubiquity of transportation, the social coordination of
mobilities has become an indispensable component, enabling
the smooth and efficient operation of marine, air, rail, and
urban road transportation, respectively [43], [44]. In the
3.0 era, travel resource coordination has become the research
focus. The primary outcomes of these studies are the stan-
dardization of transportation means and developing relevant
laws and regulations. One after another, standard-gauge rail-
way, International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at
Sea (COLREGs) [45], the Convention on International Civil
Aviation [46], and other conventions have been proposed.
The most well-known of these conventions is the Vienna
Convention on Road Traffic and Road Signs and Signals [47],
which regulates nearly all aspects of modern urban
transportation.
Transportation 4.0: Fulfilling the human need. As trans-
portation systems have become increasingly important in our
daily life, the focus of transportation system research has
shifted back to its original goal: to fulfill human needs. This
shift in research focus is fundamentally similar to all socio-
technical systems, stemming from a misallocation of resources
compared to the resource demand [48], [49]. Transportation
is fundamentally a social need, and the vast majority of
travel demand stems from social needs such as commuting
and other social activities. However, the primary owners of
transportation resources are individuals or businesses whose
primary goal in providing resources is to satisfy individ-
ual interest claims rather than social needs, squeezing the
resource for public transportation. Furthermore, transporta-
tion system development has noticeable and often negative
effects on other social systems, such as personal safety and
environmental protection [50]. Transportation 4.0 research
focuses on better aligning transportation systems with human
needs. Transportation safety and protection measures, such
as airbags and seat belts, make travel much less dangerous
to personal safety. Using new energy vehicles reduces the
environmental impact of the transportation system. New modes
of transportation, such as ride-sharing and on-demand ser-
vice, reduce the need for private ownership of transportation
resources, providing public transportation with the oppor-
tunity to improve its effectiveness in meeting its resource
needs [51], [52].
C. Artificial Intelligence: The New Frontier
In conclusion, the development of transportation systems
has experienced four paradigm shifts in its research focus
on transforming nature, creating artifacts, enhancing orga-
nization and satisfying human desires. As a socio-technical
system, the complexity of transportation systems has sig-
nificantly increased from 1.0 to 4.0, making it challenging
to achieve sufficient gains through technical optimization
alone [53].
While tackling traffic issues, taking social structural changes
into account can have surprisingly beneficial outcomes. For
example, new business models such as bike-sharing have
significantly impacted the efficiency of the traffic system,
though it contains very few technical inventions. However,
without a well-thought-out plan, such efforts may lead to
unintended consequences. For instance, the rise in popularity
of courier delivery services has increased the use of non-
motorized vehicles, leading to a corresponding increase in the
rate of accidents associated with them [54], [55]. As a result,
if a better transportation system is desired, new approaches
to combining nature, artifacts, organization, and people are
required.
Fortunately, the advancement of AI technologies has made
such convergence possible. The proliferation of intelligent
technology has enabled the transformation of many previously
human-responsive behaviors into the automatic behaviors of
machines, making direct modification of social consciousness
possible [56], [57]. As previously stated, the focus of the
transportation system has shifted towards achieving efficiency
in transforming nature, creating useful artifacts, constructing
reliable organizations, and meeting human needs with trust-
worthiness. These four most essential aspects can be combined
into one in the new Intelligent Technology era, allowing for
the synergistic optimization of multiple needs and acceleration
of the paradigm shift from technology-centered to society-
centered, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 11:37:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 4 =====

W ANG et al.: TRANSPORTATION 5.0: THE DAO TO SAFE, SECURE, AND SUSTAINABLE ITS 10265
Fig. 1. The evolution of transportation systems through four distinct phases
that align with paradigm shifts in socio-technical systems. Each phase reflects
the interplay between societal changes and technological advancements.
III. D ECENTRALISED SOCIETY (DESOC):
TRENDS AND CHALLENGES
A. From New Technology to New Social Form
In the previous sections, we discussed how intelligent
technology will facilitate the integration of natural entities,
artificial artifacts, social organizations, and humans. In this
section, we will discuss the global impact of technology and
the potential forms of future societies.
The CPSS theory considers three worlds: the Physical
World (World One), the Mental World (World Two), and
the Artificial World (World Three), as an organic whole [4].
This perspective proposes a profound understanding of the
laws of socio-technical system development. As illustrated
in Fig. 2, changes initially occur in the artificial world, which
subsequently affects the mental and physical worlds. The
three worlds connected through the artificial world, namely,
a parallel world, will eventually serve as critical foundations
for future advancements. The artificial world we are facing
today has undergone significant transformation leading to a
consequential impact on our mental and physical surroundings.
Recognizing these changes appropriately is a prerequisite for
the advancement of transportation systems.
B. The Decentralization Trends
As new social forms are gradually being constructed, the
development of intelligent technology serves as the catalyst,
while the development of energy technology and commu-
nication technology respectively provides the material and
informational exchange infrastructures. We believe that these
three technological innovations have profoundly changed the
human-made world and further shaped the present physical
and mental world. Ultimately, society will evolve and develop
towards a decentralized direction and trend.
• Energy Technology. The development of clean energy
is considered as crucial technological advancement that
relieves human-environmental tensions from fossil fuel
consumption. Furthermore, it has accelerated the matura-
tion of battery technology. Presently, the development and
widespread usage of electric vehicles and smartphones
are closely linked to innovations in battery technol-
ogy [58], [59], [60]. The shift from the centralized supply
of fossil fuels, such as coal and natural gas, to the
decentralized supply of battery-based energy, reflects a
move towards decentralization in energy utilization. More
importantly, this progress in energy technology provides
a key enabling foundation for the development of digital
technologies.
• Communication Technology. Communication technol-
ogy is an indispensable aspect of modern civilization in
the 21st century, with smartphones leading to extensive
advancements [61], [62]. These changes have signifi-
cantly impacted modern life. The widespread use of mod-
ern communication technologies like WiFi and 5G have
integrated search engines and e-commerce into everyday
life. Social networks and short videos have replaced
traditional news sources and leisure activities [63], [64].
• Intelligent Technology. Web and communication ser-
vices have driven the development of technologies such
as recommendation engines, large-scale databases, and
application-specific integrated circuits. These innova-
tions have enabled the processing of large volumes of
data and facilitated the creation of powerful computing
infrastructures, which have fueled the development of
AI technologies capable of performing various intelli-
gent tasks [65], [66]. Deep learning, along with various
new technologies, has dramatically increased automation
in speech and image recognition as well as intelli-
gent decision-making [67], [68], [69]. However, these
advancements sometimes pose a challenge for humans
to comprehend.
Initially, these technological advancements were devel-
oped to enhance human connectivity and increase efficiency.
However, their development has often led to unforeseen conse-
quences. While social networks and short videos have acceler-
ated the spread of news, they have simultaneously exacerbated
the problem of information cocoons and the fragmentation
of opinions [70]. The widespread adoption of smartphones
and online entertainment has made attention one of the most
highly sought-after and in-demand commodities of our era.
These technological advancements affect the physical world
in addition to the mental world. Cities have become crowded
with intelligent technology, including face-recognition cam-
eras and even autonomous vehicles (A Vs). Due to internet
accessibility and remote work, the geographical distribution
of the workforce underwent notable transformations [71].
C. The Challenges of New Social Form
The rise of the aforementioned technological innovations
has led to societal fragmentation, with increasingly decen-
tralized information channels, diverse controlling subjects,
and pluralistic value orientations [72]. Bitcoin and other
decentralized digital currencies, as well as Non-Fungible
Tokens (NFTs), have gained immense popularity [73]. The
most powerful subjects that influence society have shifted
from city mayors to internet users who can post relevant
news at the right time. Celebrities are no longer able to
maintain their careers for decades, and instead, the concept
of “15 minutes of fame” introduced by Andy Warhol has
taken their place [74]. The phenomenon described above is
often referred to as DeSoc, which stands for Decentralized
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 11:37:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 5 =====

10266 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 24, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2023
Fig. 2. Three worlds in socio-technical systems shows the interconnected nature of the Physical World (World One), Mental World (World Two), and
Artificial World (World Three).
Society [75], [76]. Three of these changes in DeSoc, which
have had a significant impact on the transportation system,
will be examined in detail below.
1) Decentralization of Information Channels: In the era of
Web 3.0, the development of mobile apps and IoT technology
has enabled almost anything to be transformed into a viable
information channel [77]. Theoretically, more comprehensive
information sources could enhance traffic management sys-
tems’ accuracy and efficiency [78]; however, data barriers
such as data segregation due to privacy protection laws and
competing relationships among systems impose significant
limitations on this approach. These barriers obstruct infor-
mation channels and substantially restrict the transportation
system’s ability to adjust dynamically to evolving conditions.
Despite a considerable amount of data used to analyze and
monitor traffic dynamics, data-driven decision-making tech-
nologies often have limited access to local data, and their
potential to benefit society remains untapped.
The primary cause of data barriers is the lack of well-defined
and properly implemented data pricing methods [79], [80].
A price that is deemed reasonable and equitable must be
agreed upon by both data providers and consumers to facilitate
collaboration. Current data pricing strategies are typically
tailored for single-system information channels where a single
data source is targeted for a particular scenario. This hinders
the growth of a mature data market and ultimately leads to
the existence of data barriers. Balancing the privacy needs of
individuals and the concerns of businesses about the dimin-
ishing value of data as a result of privacy violations remains
a challenging and unresolved issue. New industry chains,
including data collaboration platforms and data as a service
(DaaS) [81], should be indispensable tools for overcoming this
barrier.
2) Absence of Consensus: Individuals often perceive and
react to phenomena differently. In the past, the uniqueness of
advertising channels resulted in society overlooking individ-
ual diversity and, therefore, lessening its influence on social
interaction. The fragmentation of information channels has
made the effects of diversity more apparent over time [82].
Nowadays, it is common for two contrasting mainstream views
on significant social issues to surface, indicating that the
current mechanism for forming a consensus is not suitable
for current situations.
Building simulation systems is the typical solution to reach-
ing consensus in social engineering. Participants can reach a
consensus on the mechanism and response strategy of a social
phenomenon by mathematically modeling it and fitting obser-
vations to it. In the domain of ITS, examples of consensus
are traffic flow models, car-following models, lane-changing
models, and human driver models created through simulation.
Current traffic system simulations depend on rules made
by experts that constitute a singular consensus. Designing a
system in this way accommodates simple social systems with
one data source and allows researchers and decision-makers to
create a dataset to assess the effectiveness of traffic planning
and control strategies. However, with the increasing abundance
of traffic data, the disparities between simulated data and
actual data are becoming more apparent. Furthermore, the
increase in control devices has made algorithms relying on
simulation systems less dependable.
To solve these problems, the existing consensus formation
mechanisms need to be combined with varying perspectives
based on the observer, encompassing a wider range of facets.
The simulation mechanism should be automatically separated
into several sub-simulations based on different observation
perspectives and then altered using a data-driven, learning-
based method. This shift is significant because it replaces a
strongly consistent consensus with a mechanism for reaching
local consensus on matters of common interest. For example,
when utilizing a data-driven approach for a car-following
model in a specific region, the simulation output will adjust to
the area’s data granularity and patterns. Such a paradigm will
allow each district to present data in diverse formats, which is
non-trivially different from the traditional method.
3) Conflicting Interests: In the transportation industry, con-
flicts have been resolved by researchers using macro-level
statistics. For example, the crowding-out effect of private
cars on public transportation has been identified, leading to
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 11:37:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 6 =====

W ANG et al.: TRANSPORTATION 5.0: THE DAO TO SAFE, SECURE, AND SUSTAINABLE ITS 10267
the creation of bus lanes [83]. However, in situations where
information sources are widely distributed and consensus can
only be reached at the local level, participants may develop
conflicting interests. Drivers tend to criticize pedestrians who
cross the street, but they also tend to complain about drivers
who fail to yield when they are not driving. These dis-
agreements are common, and in situations where there is
competition for resources, divergent opinions on who should
have the right to own or use limited resources or benefits are
likely to arise.
While macro-level statistics have been used to resolve
conflicts in the transportation industry, micro-level conflicts
have also been identified through data collection technologies
and control devices. For example, decision-makers in the
transportation industry often choose to optimize arterial traffic
volumes at the expense of non-arterial traffic when traffic
data is limited, which can be effective. However, with the
emergence of mobile apps that enable individuals to predict
their arrival time, there is a risk of a significant surge of
vehicles on the arterial path, which can undermine the signal
optimization strategy [84].
The above examples demonstrate that when there is ample
information available but no significant consensus on how
to allocate limited resources or benefits, relying solely on
macro-level statistics and control methods may not be suf-
ficient to address complex social conflicts. Instead, a mul-
tidimensional control strategy must be developed to address
the dynamic game characteristics of social behavior, especially
when micro-level factors can significantly alter the expected
outcome.
IV. T RANSPORTATION 5.0: T HE DAO TO SAFE ,
SECURE AND SUSTAINABLE ITS
The advancement of technology, particularly the Internet
and information technology, has led to decentralization in
numerous aspects of society, such as information channels,
societal consensus, and interest demands. This shift has sig-
nificantly impacted the design, planning, and management
of transportation systems, which have traditionally relied on
experience, theory, and values.
Current centralized transportation systems often face numer-
ous challenges in adapting to a decentralized society. Cen-
tralized transportation systems, which are normally designed
and managed by a unified authority, assume that the public
transportation demands are relatively uniform. On the con-
trary, in a decentralized society, these systems face several
challenges in adapting to the diverse needs and expectations
of individuals and communities. These challenges can be
categorized into three aspects: description, prediction, and
prescription [85].
• Description: Centralized systems often struggle to adapt
to the highly heterogeneous and dispersed data found
in a decentralized society. These systems may fail to
obtain timely and efficient information, which is crucial
for making agile decisions and adjustments. In a decen-
tralized context, data sources and information are more
diverse, requiring more robust data collection and analysis
methods.
• Prediction: In centralized predictive models, it is difficult
to accurately adapt to the differences between local
areas within the transportation system, since each area
may have unique characteristics and requirements that
a centralized model cannot fully capture. Consequently,
predictions made by such models might not be as accurate
or useful for all regions, leading to suboptimal transporta-
tion planning and resource allocation.
• Prescription: Centralized methods lack the precise and
effective control, which are needed to address the diverse
demands of a decentralized society. The one-size-fits-all
approach may result in inadequate solutions for specific
situations or regions, and the implementation of these
solutions may be delayed due to the bureaucratic nature of
centralized systems. This can lead to decreased efficiency
and satisfaction among users of the transportation system.
The challenges faced by centralized transportation systems
in a decentralized society highlight the need for innovative
technologies and approaches that cater to the diverse needs of
individuals and communities. ITS in the era of Transportation
5.0 effectively utilizes communication, information technolo-
gies, and AI for efficient data-driven traffic management,
monitoring, prediction, and behavior analysis. By employing
advanced technologies such as AI, Blockchain, DAO 2, and
privacy-preserving computing, ITS addresses the description,
prediction, and prescription aspects of challenges through the
implementation of Privacy Data Collaboration, Transportation
Foundation Models, and Decentralized Autonomous Operation
and Organization.
Specifically, the widespread use of AI in ITS applications
such as autonomous driving, traffic signal control, traffic flow
forecasting, demand modeling, driving behavior analysis, and
traffic incident monitoring enhances the efficiency and effec-
tiveness of transportation systems in a decentralized context.
One example is the use of cooperative driving automation
for behavior between vehicles, infrastructure, and other road
users to improve overall system performance ( [86], [87], [88],
[89], [90], [91]). These applications can be deployed in a
decentralized system that is powered by Blockchain tech-
nology, which is usually referred to as DAO 2. The DAO 2
can manage a wide range of functions of complex and
sophisticated systems through Smart contracts, which are exe-
cuted automatically without centralized control, transparently
recorded on a Blockchain, and can be incentivized through
the use of characterized tokens. In addition, privacy-preserving
computing further strengthens the entire system by allowing
for data processing and analysis without compromising the
privacy of individuals. It can help to improve the security and
privacy of data, guaranteeing that data is kept private while
still enabling computation and analysis. By combining these
technologies, the development of Transportation 5.0 can evolve
towards TRUE2, which stands for the four important indicators
of Trust (T), Reliable (R), Usable (U), and Effective +
Efficient (E).
A. Privacy-Preserving Data Collaboration
In the era of Transportation 5.0, the development of hard-
ware, algorithms, and software systems centered on data
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 11:37:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 7 =====

10268 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 24, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2023
technology has opened up new opportunities for ITS research
and development [92]. Traffic data collection has moved
beyond physical space and into cyber and social space, includ-
ing travel service platforms, social media, and portable mobile
devices. The increase in data volume and complexity has
stimulated cross-disciplinary research and the emergence of
technologies such as data mining, natural language processing,
deep learning, and others.
In the past, traffic data collection was primarily focused on
measuring the volume of cars and other vehicles on roads and
highways. This was done using physical sensors and cameras
that were installed at various points along the roadways.
Traditional data collection methods in physical and cyber
space have limitations in terms of the space covered and the
ability to capture the entire traffic process and environmental
variables. With the rise of digital technology and social media,
traffic data collection has expanded to include monitoring
of social activity as well, such as tracking the number of
visitors to location-based services. The data collected from
social space can assist in addressing challenges in physical and
cyber space data collection [93]. Social space data can pro-
vide valuable insights into people’s transportation perceptions
and behaviors and improve the accuracy of traffic prediction
models.
Social data collection, combined with privacy-preserving
computing, blockchain, and distributed computing, can
improve transportation data utilization in a broader social
context. DAO-based city management provides an efficient
method for optimizing data utilization and integrating it with
data from other subsystems [94]. This could lead to a better
understanding of urban dynamics and the development of a
multi-system simulation based on data. Implementing a data
pricing mechanism could encourage even more data sharing
and improve data circulation in a variety of fields. Blockchain
technology could result in a secure and decentralized data
platform, increasing trust and authenticity in data transactions
and improving system security.
In summary, the emergence of advanced technologies such
as privacy-preserving computing, blockchain, and distributed
computing in the cloud computing and AI era opens up new
opportunities for privacy data collaboration. By incorporating
these technologies into ITS, we can overcome data hetero-
geneity, real-time processing, and scalability challenges. This
could be helpful in the creation of a data-driven multi-system
simulation and the optimization of urban resource allocation,
resulting in the greatest possible social benefits.
B. Traffic Foundation Models
Simulation techniques are commonly used in transportation
planning and control decisions, with traffic simulation tech-
nology widely utilized to study the operational mechanisms
of cities. Traffic simulation models are built upon the traf-
fic foundation model, utilizing models of individual agents
or groups of agents (such as vehicles or pedestrians) that
interact with the infrastructure in the simulated environment.
To capture the complexities of urban cities accurately, it is
crucial to analyze diverse road user behaviors. The Next
Generation Simulation (NGSIM) datasets, provided by the
USDOT, offer valuable real-world data for studying and under-
standing the interactions among different road users. The work
by Xia et al. [95] has contributed to extracting an enhanced
version of the NGSIM dataset. However, urban cities are
complex and dynamic social systems, where the development
of the traffic system is not only the interaction between
various traffic players but also changes in social structure and
form, presenting new challenges for the future development of
simulation technology.
Various simulation models, including macroscopic, micro-
scopic, mesoscopic, and vehicle-level simulation, have been
developed to address the challenge of accurately simulating
complex large-scale behavior in traffic [86], [96], [97], [98],
[99], [100]. These models simplify the system by focusing on
a single scale, providing different levels of detail and insights
into traffic behavior. In addition, traffic simulation models that
depend on rule-based methods utilizing pre-existing models,
algorithms, and rules find it challenging to manage high-
complexity large-scale agent behavior [101]. As urban systems
become more complex, it becomes increasingly difficult to
simulate real-time traffic responses dynamically, necessitating
more advanced and adaptive simulation methods [102].
In fact, traffic simulation systems can be considered funda-
mental models for a variety of traffic-related tasks. By using
computer algorithms and mathematical models to replicate the
behavior of traffic systems, these simulations provide valuable
insights into the traffic flow, congestion patterns, and the
impact of various transportation policies and infrastructure
changes. Data-driven traffic simulation models can serve as
pre-trained models for tasks such as traffic flow prediction
and traffic signal control. These models have been successfully
applied in various fields, including visual and natural language
processing, and general decision-making.
By applying cutting-edge methods such as deep neural
networks, graph learning, and multi-source data integration,
we could turn traffic simulation into Transportation Foun-
dation models, and transform task-specific intelligence into
scenarios-oriented generic intelligence. The traffic founda-
tion model is a theoretical framework used to understand
traffic phenomena and solve scenario-based problems [94].
Fig. 3 shows one of these models, TengYun, which is designed
and developed with parallel learning and federated intelligence
in TransVerse [103]. It addresses the challenge of insufficient,
contradictory, and inconsistently distributed data by imple-
menting data pre-processing, entity alignment, and scenario
engineering [104]. It also adopts a “pre-training + prompt
tuning” approach to training, which significantly reduces the
computational resources and storage required for fine-tuning
on edge servers while increasing the utilization of traffic
knowledge [105]. TengYunprovides a solution to the challenge
of integrating and utilizing transportation data for efficient and
effective management and operation.
TransWorld is an innovative traffic simulation model orig-
inally developed by the CAST Lab with the primary objec-
tive of constructing Artificial Transportation Systems (ATS)
through agent-based technology and object-oriented pro-
gramming [106]. The model simulates social and behav-
ioral patterns using autonomous agents, which are guided
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 11:37:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 8 =====

W ANG et al.: TRANSPORTATION 5.0: THE DAO TO SAFE, SECURE, AND SUSTAINABLE ITS 10269
Fig. 3. Conceptual framework of the Transportation Foundation Model for cognition, operation, and management. The model incorporates advanced techniques,
such as deep neural networks, graph learning, and multi-source data integration, to facilitate scenario-oriented, generic intelligence in traffic simulation.
by population statistics and behavioral models. Its application
proves especially valuable in verifying and validating trans-
portation operations, particularly at the logic level. Through
agent interactions, TransWorld can provide a comprehensive
description of traffic scenarios at various resolutions. The
future of transportation modeling is expected to embrace
advanced technologies and methodologies. These upcoming
models must possess scalability, flexibility, and expandabil-
ity to effectively manage the exponential complexity growth
of transportation systems. Furthermore, future traffic models
should be data-driven, serving as foundational tools to tackle
intricate transportation problems by leveraging real-world
data [107], [108].
C. Decentralized Autonomous Operations and
Organizations (DAO2)
ITS is a complex system comprised of several subsystems
that include multiple participants. These subsystems func-
tion interactively to satisfy multitudinous demands such as
commuting and tourism. Upon a sophisticated understanding
of the system complexity of ITS through the data collec-
tion/coordination, modeling, and simulation, the behaviors of
participants in ITS can be predicted, whereas the ultimate goal
is to manage and control the entire system. The control of ITS
aims to achieve a safer, more efficient, and sustainable traffic
system by balancing traffic demands and the infrastructure
capacity, with the consideration of comfort, safety, emission,
and energy consumption requirements [53], [109].
Traffic management and control systems have made signifi-
cant progress in recent decades to improve the performance
of traffic infrastructures and vehicles through the devel-
opment of various effective traffic control methods. These
control methods can be generally classified based on the
response time (e.g., from milliseconds to days) and controlled
objects (e.g., regarding infrastructures or vehicles) as depicted
in Table I.
Accurate measurement and estimation of traffic states play
a crucial role in enabling more efficient, safer, and sustainable
traffic control strategies [110]. Existing control methods are
theoretically mature and have evolved towards more expe-
ditious, agile, and adaptive with the aid of AI in the era
of Transportation 5.0. However, the complex nature of ITS
has impeded these methods from functioning as intended in
practice and enforced the entire system into the Braess paradox
while implementing these methods without coordination [111],
[112]. For instance, the green-wave traffic signal control may
induce traffic congestion on uncontrolled roads, reduce the
network capacity, and ultimately deteriorate the overall traffic
efficiency [113]. Therefore, investigating integrated and coor-
dinated control methods with the consideration of participants
in multiple ITS subsystems and scales, as well as with multiple
objectives renders a non-trivial challenge to be tackled.
Recent studies have made some efforts on multi-scale and
multi-objective integrated traffic control, which have suggested
its efficiency in mitigating traffic congestion, guaranteeing
safety, and enhancing sustainability. Typical studies include the
integration and coordination of multiple infrastructure control
methods within one specific subsystem (e.g., on highways)
[114], [115] or in multiple subsystems (e.g, on highways
and urban roads) [106], multiple connected and automated
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 11:37:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 9 =====

10270 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 24, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2023
TABLE I
TRAFFIC CONTROL MEASURES IN THE ERA OF TRANSPORTATION 5.0
vehicles [90], [116], as well as between road infrastructures
and vehicles [117], [118]. These studies are conducted either
in a centralized or a decentralized scheme. The centralized
scheme normally assumes perfect knowledge of all the con-
trolled participants’ states, based on which a generalized
objective is formulated summarizing the objectives of each
controlled participant. On the contrary, under the decentralized
scheme, the involved participants are controlled based on their
own objectives, which are correlated to the observation and
prediction of their connected participants’ states. While the
centralized scheme is struggling with its scalability, stability,
and security, which makes it incompetent of handling unlim-
ited participants with heterogeneous attributes (e.g., different
scales, response times, control objectives, etc.); control meth-
ods adopting the decentralized scheme also leave much to be
desired with their compromise on the optimality [119]. Fortu-
nately, the emergence of Blockchain technology and DAO2 has
shed some light on solving the issue of developing integrated
and coordinated traffic control systems in a trustable, reliable,
useful, and efficient manner [120], [121], [122], [123].
By implementing a system based on DAO 2, coordi-
nated control across multiple participants and subsystems
can be achieved through a series of smart contracts [94].
Specifically, the absence of centralized authority supported
by Blockchain technology offers security and transparency,
as well as simplifies and secures the sharing among a range
of traffic data from different subsystems, including vehicle
location, travel speed, traffic signal, etc.; Smart contracts
can further process these data automatically and enabling
appropriate actions to enhance traffic conditions. In gen-
eral, this approach enables community-driven autonomy that
aligns with the principles of mutual benefits, transparency,
and safety [124].
For example, traffic signals can be dynamically controlled
based on DAO 2 by a series of smart contracts that optimize
traffic flow and reduce congestion based on real-time data,
such as vehicle location and speed [125]. These smart con-
tracts can also facilitate the objectives of other participants
in different subsystems, such as the safety of pedestrians and
cyclists, by monitoring their behavior using real-time sensor
data and taking appropriate actions, such as modifying traffic
signals, to achieve mutual benefits. Furthermore, Blockchain
technology guarantees secure and transparency within ITS. For
instance, while implementing a smart ticketing system for pub-
lic transportation, the DAO2-based integrated control approach
can effectively reduce ticket fraud and decrease administra-
tive expenses, meanwhile facilitating other objectives, such
as reducing traffic congestion, through decentralized and
tamper-proof record management.
In summary, the combination of ITS and blockchain tech-
nology can achieve more efficient, safer, and sustainable
traffic control. Through integrated and coordinated control
via Blockchain technology and DAO 2, the traffic system can
indeed better meet people’s travel demands while reducing
traffic congestion, improving safety, and contributing to the
sustainable development of cities.
D. Welcome to HANOI
The three cornerstone technologies, namely Privacy-
preserving Data Collaboration, Traffic Foundation Models,
and DAO 2, provide support for the future ITS from the
perspectives of description, prediction, and prescription, shown
in Fig. 4. These technologies are also prepared to meet the
technical and social architecture requirements of Transporta-
tion 5.0, the decentralized society. Through Privacy-preserving
data collaboration, information can be collected from dis-
persed sources, and the Foundation Model can form a
unified consensus from fragmented social organizations.
Finally, the DAO 2 align the interests of all parties to max-
imize overall social benefits. Compared with Transportation
4.0, Transportation 5.0 involves a significantly increased
number of participants. Therefore, the technical require-
ments are broader, including IoT, blockchain, and intelligent
technologies.
In essence, the core of these three technologies is to
achieve the coalescence of social consensus. From the most
basic consensus of information disclosure methods, gradually
developing into the consensus of overall status cognition,
forming a consensus on the behavior of each subject in local
time and space, and ultimately precipitating into a series of
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 11:37:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 10 =====

W ANG et al.: TRANSPORTATION 5.0: THE DAO TO SAFE, SECURE, AND SUSTAINABLE ITS 10271
Fig. 4. Illustration of the three cornerstone technologies, namely Privacy Data
Collaboration, Integrated Simulation System, and Integrated Decision-making,
which play a crucial role in shaping the future of ITS.
long-term consensus on behavior norms and resource exchange
ratios. The first three consensuses often play a role in the
social subsystem of transportation, while the last long-term
consensus will have an impact beyond transportation, achiev-
ing an organic fusion of transportation, and the other social
subsystem.
Although there is still much research required on the specific
form and implementation path of these consensuses, it is
believed that their ultimate goal is to achieve the TRUE 2
of the overall system, that is the four important indicators
of Trust (T), Reliable (R), Usable (U), and Effective +
Efficient (E). It also aims to ensure safety in the physical world
(Safety Index), security in the information world (Security
Index), sustainability in the ecological world (Sustainability
Index), optimization of individual needs and rights (Sensitiv-
ity Index), high-quality services for everyone (Service Index),
and intelligent infrastructure for everyone (Smartness Index)
in the 6S society. Therefore, the “6I” intelligence is required,
including Cognitive Intelligence and Parallel Intelligence at
the technical level, Crypto Intelligence and Federated Intel-
ligence at the operational and management level, and Social
Intelligence and Ecological Intelligence at the organizational
level [126]. This intelligence will ultimately form HANOI,
which is a combination of human intelligence (H), artificial
intelligence (A), natural intelligence (N), and organizational
intelligence (OI) [127]. Fig. 5 explains the six types of
intelligence and indexes that form HAONI.
V. F UTURE SCENARIOS AND REQUIRED SYSTEMS
In addition to cornerstone technologies and tool systems,
new traffic modes such as Mobility as a Service (MaaS) and
autonomous driving are emerging to accommodate alterations
in social structures. The future ITS scenarios will guide future
transportation development.
A. Social-Participated AI Test and Scenario Engineering
The successful deployment and commercialization of Intel-
ligent agents, such as A Vs, necessitate extensive testing.
However, the growth of AI tests has been hindered due to
insufficient relevant data and repetitive test scenarios.
Inspired by the concept of DAO 2, AI tests should not be
constrained to a single type of vehicle or restricted area.
Socially participated AI tests should be adopted, in which
tests are conducted in diverse contexts with many connected
vehicles, conventional vehicles equipped with data collectors,
and all traffic participants (including bicycles and pedestrians).
SE (Scenario Engineering) is an integrated reflection of the
scenarios and activities within a certain temporal and spatial
range, where all actionable AI are encouraged to complete
the design, certification, and verification [126]. SE shapes
the AI systems to be more coherent to their original testing
purpose by preventing repetitive scenarios and generating more
valuable scenarios. Parallel learning is proposed as a good
tool for the AI test and scenario engineering [128]. DeCAST
in the TransVerse platform was designed and constructed
according to the principle of DAO 2, as shown in Fig. 6 [94].
Through parallel learning, the evaluation and development
of A Vs could be greatly accelerated. As a case study,
Li et al. [129] present how to design reliable intelligence tests
for A Vs.
It is essential to acquire a significant amount of data for
the AI testing method in generating comprehensive scenar-
ios, especially for mixed-traffic environments. Comprehensive
scenarios, in turn, can alleviate the bottleneck in developing
autonomous driving technology. To accomplish this goal,
an integrated testing platform is required to connect the
virtual simulation test field, human-driven driving simula-
tor, and actual test field. As a result, it will establish a
closed-loop process to develop, test, and advance new tech-
nologies. The proposed simulation-driven AI could meet the
requirement for the Try-Test-Adjust design policy to build
an intelligent machine when integrating virtual with real data
collected [130].
B. Trans-Scale Control and RoW-Based Traffic System
The current control range of traffic lights has raised research
concerns, as signal lights are placed only at intersections
and expressway ramps, leading to potential conflicts. Right
of Way (RoW) in traffic interactions could be a crucial
new concept and technology in overcoming the challenges
associated with traditional traffic control.
To fully utilize limited road resources, an efficient traffic
control system must address the following challenges:
• Precisely determining the arrival time of vehicles at
intersections to deploy appropriate control signals;
• Ensuring that the distribution and communication of RoW
are seamlessly integrated throughout the entire driving
process;
• Accurately measuring and controlling the movement of
each vehicle on the road.
The emergence and advancement of V2X technology pro-
vide new opportunities to address RoW ownership issues.
It creates a network connecting humans, vehicles, roads,
and other transportation elements, allowing for ubiquitous
information sharing. However, the transportation system faces
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 11:37:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 11 =====

10272 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 24, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2023
Fig. 5. The six types of intelligence and indexes that form HANOI. This figure shows the different types of intelligence and corresponding indexes
that contribute to the ultimate goal of achieving Trust, Reliable, Usable, and Effective + Efficient (TRUE2) transportation systems. HANOI represents the
combination of human intelligence (H), artificial intelligence (A), natural intelligence (N), and organizational intelligence (OI) to ensure the overall success
of the transportation system.
Fig. 6. The platform architecture of DeCAST: Parallel transportation
management and control.
challenges due to the absence of a unified control objective
for coordinated subsystem control. A new concept called
“Generalized Right of Way” is required to address this
issue in traffic systems across various agents at different
scales. As a general usufruct of the transportation system,
the RoW is a fundamental attribute granting permission to
occupy specific travel resources for a specific period. By uti-
lizing this concept, a trans-scale traffic control system can
be constructed to address the issue of fragmented control
strategies.
With the continuous development of urban intermodal
transportation demand, the limitations of single scale control
methods gradually emerge, restricting the ability to integrate
multi-scale schemes to achieve control objectives. Recently,
some studies have been conducted to explore the cooper-
ation of trans-scale traffic control tasks. As an important
issue in ITS, how to develop a unified control mechanism
from the standpoint of maximizing social resource allocation
and appropriately coordinating the employment of multiple
control modes still requires further in-depth research. The
RoW facilitates seamless transformation between different
subsystems and scales within the traffic system by quantifying
one aspect’s impact on all others. Based on the unified control
objective (RoW), a multi-agents collaboration mechanism for
trans-scale traffic control can be achieved. The mechanism
allows for a multi-agent joint control scenario, due to its
development in accordance with the percentage of resource
consumption and control effectiveness of each agent.
The RoW can also be exchanged with currency, carbon
emissions, energy consumption, and other rights/interests to
achieve a tradable system. By connecting the transportation
subsystem with the carbon sink trading system and LBS
system, this system can improve resource allocation based
on data integration from users and various travel resources.
Then, by collaboratively controlling all elements in a complex
traffic system and abstracting numerous social interactions as
generalized usage rights, a unified quantitative method for
resource recycling mechanisms can be provided. Furthermore,
the cross-system decision-making scheme to optimize the
overall social benefits can be used to allocate social resources.
As one of the best practices of traffic control based on RoW
theory, an application of parallel transportation system, Traffic
Operation Recommendation for Controlling Hangzhou Road
Networks (TORCH), has been successfully deployed on the
Hangzhou road network, realizing city-level traffic control at
more than 1,000 intersections while enhancing the capacity
of handling traffic congestion incidents by two to three times,
as shown in Fig. 7.
We have also investigated proactively preventing collisions
using a set of decision criteria for A Vs to effectively determine
the RoW [131]. In order to boost driving safety for A Vs,
we have identified three key concepts and developed a rule-
based, nine-step communication-decision paradigm, as shown
in Fig. 8. The decision criteria are intended to be clear and
quickly computed with the least amount of communication
so that human drivers and A Vs can comprehend each other’s
behaviors and intents.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 11:37:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 12 =====

W ANG et al.: TRANSPORTATION 5.0: THE DAO TO SAFE, SECURE, AND SUSTAINABLE ITS 10273
Fig. 7. Traffic Operation Recommendation for Controlling Hangzhou Road
Networks (TORCH) is an exemplary application of a parallel transportation
system that demonstrates one of the best practices in traffic control based on
the concept of RoW theory. (a) The case study area of TORCH, and (b) The
architecture of TORCH.
Fig. 8. Flowchart of the communication-decision model for RoW in proactive
collision prevention for A Vs. The model outlines a rule-based, nine-step
paradigm that facilitates clear and efficient communication between A Vs and
human drivers, ensuring safe and coordinated interactions on the road.
C. MaaS and Human-Oriented Operating Systems
MaaS is an emerging transportation business model that
assembles the services of different mobility service providers
through exchanging data, simplifying intermediation, and pro-
viding customers with seamless service and a unified payment
interface through a continuous pipeline. While there are mul-
tiple definitions of MaaS, most share a common vision of
transforming the need for ownership of vehicles to enable users
to access the most desirable shared mode of transportation
on a trip-by-trip basis. Several cities worldwide have already
adopted the concept of MaaS, numerous practical studies on
driving MaaS implementation [132] and research examining
the business models of MaaS [133] have been published in
recent years. For city administrators, MaaS provides an oppor-
tunity to build and operate city-scale transportation systems
and services in a holistic manner, rather than managing each
transportation service independently.
A completely new system is needed to integrate all aspects
of transportation into social life. Such a system will present a
unified, human-oriented interface, coordinating with people’s
behavior habits and preferences, and use human feedback
to improve its underlying agent system. Some researchers
suggest that such a system could be called a Human-oriented
Operating System (H2OS) [134]. Like the operating system
for computer software and hardware, H2OS is a complex
system composed of multiple components that can virtualize
transportation resources, parallelize transportation requests,
and apply transportation planning to real-world operation.
The H2OS for transportation environment includes multi-
ple components, such as traffic data collection, processing,
and storage modules, traffic request management modules,
resource scheduling modules, etc. Through component col-
laborations, H2OS can virtualize and optimize transportation
resources, making transportation smarter and more efficient.
A core feature of H2OS is its unified interface through which
users can easily obtain transportation resources and perform
planning and scheduling operations.
In the design of H2OS, a decentralized architecture should
be used, which provides numerous benefits. For instance,
it makes H2OS more resilient to local failures or attacks. Addi-
tionally, as new nodes join the network, they can contribute
their resources to the system, enabling H2OS to scale more
easily. This architecture can also enable H2OS to allocate and
optimize transportation resources more efficiently, as it can
take advantage of distributed computing and real-time data
processing to make better decisions. Furthermore, privacy and
security can be improved as the users’ data is distributed across
the network rather than being stored in a central location. This
can also make the system more transparent and accountable,
as all network participants can view the system’s transactions
and operations.
VI. F UTURE AND VISION
In conclusion, it is important to emphasize the ongoing
paradigm shift in ITS from a technology-centric focus to
a more society-centric one. This transition is being driven
by adopting Cyber-Physical-Social Systems architecture and
parallel systems methodology, which offer innovative and
comprehensive solutions to pressing transportation challenges.
These approaches are being rapidly developed and imple-
mented across three key applications: Privacy-preserving Data
Collaboration, Traffic Foundation Models, and Decentralized
Autonomous Operation and Organization.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 11:37:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 13 =====

10274 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 24, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2023
The success of past and present ITS practices validates
the position and related assertions of ITSS TC for Trans-
portation 5.0 proposed a decade ago. As the development of
ITS continues to evolve, scenarios such as social-participated
AI Test, ROW-based traffic control, and MaaS will play a
crucial role in advancing ITS towards a more society-centered
architecture. This significant shift will not only transform the
ITS landscape but also profoundly impact the organization of
related fields, such as urban planning, energy, and environ-
ment, steering transportation systems toward human welfare
and sustainability-centered objectives.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors sincerely appreciate the researchers with the
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, including Ding
Wang, Shengyue Yao, Jia Xu, Jingru Yu, Yi Yu, Xuhong Wang,
Wei Hu, and Yiwen Cong, for their valuable contributions
to this article. Their insightful discussions and expertise in
data collaboration, traffic simulation, and vehicle control were
essential in the completion of this research.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Tuominen and T. Ahlqvist, “Is the transport system becoming
ubiquitous? Socio-technical roadmapping as a tool for integrating the
development of transport policies and intelligent transport systems and
services in Finland,” Technological Forecasting Social Change, vol. 77,
no. 1, pp. 120–134, Jan. 2010.
[2] H. Kopackova and P. Libalova, “Smart city concept as socio-technical
system,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Digit. Technol. (IDT), Jul. 2017,
pp. 198–205.
[3] F.-Y . Wang and J. J. Zhang, “Transportation 5.0 in CPSS: Towards
ACP-based society-centered intelligent transportation,” in Proc. IEEE
20th Int. Conf. Intell. Transp. Syst. (ITSC), Oct. 2017, pp. 762–767.
[Online]. Available: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8317905/
[4] K. Popper, Three Worlds. Ann Arbor, MI, USA: Univ. Michigan Ann
Arbor, 1979.
[5] F.-Y . Wang, “The emergence of intelligent enterprises: From
CPS to CPSS,” IEEE Intell. Syst., vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 85–88,
Jul. 2010.
[6] F.-Y . Wang, Q. Miao, X. Li, X. Wang, and Y . Lin, “What does
ChatGPT say: The DAO from algorithmic intelligence to linguistic
intelligence,” IEEE/CAA J. Autom. Sinica, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 575–579,
Mar. 2023.
[7] H. Zhou and H. Gao, “The impact of urban morphology on urban
transportation mode: A case study of Tokyo,”Case Stud. Transp. Policy,
vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 197–205, Mar. 2020.
[8] T. Roughgarden, Selfish Routing and the Price of Anarchy. Cambridge,
MA, USA: MIT Press, 2005.
[9] R. Zhang, K. Spieser, E. Frazzoli, and M. Pavone, “Models, algorithms,
and evaluation for autonomous mobility-on-demand systems,” in Proc.
Amer. Control Conf. (ACC), Jul. 2015, pp. 2573–2587.
[10] H. Andersen et al., “Autonomous personal mobility scooter for multi-
class mobility-on-demand service,” in Proc. IEEE 19th Int. Conf. Intell.
Transp. Syst. (ITSC), Nov. 2016, pp. 1753–1760.
[11] R. Zhang, F. Rossi, and M. Pavone, “Analysis, control, and evaluation
of mobility-on-demand systems: A queueing-theoretical approach,”
IEEE Trans. Control Netw. Syst., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 115–126,
Mar. 2019.
[12] Beijing Transportation Research Center. (2019). 2019 Transportation
Annual Report of Beijing. [Online]. Available: https://www.bjtrc.org.
cn/List/index/cid/7.html
[13] Beijing Transportation Research Center. (2021). 2021 Transportation
Annual Report of Beijing. [Online]. Available: https://www.bjtrc.org.
cn/List/index/cid/7.html
[14] A. Validi et al., “Hybrid on/off blockchain approach for vehicle data
management, processing and visualization exemplified by the ADAPT
platform,” in Proc. IEEE 25th Int. Conf. Intell. Transp. Syst. (ITSC),
Oct. 2022, pp. 3152–3158.
[15] W. Barfield and T. A. Dingus, Human Factors in Intelligent Trans-
portation Systems. London, U.K.: Psychology Press, 2014.
[16] L. Chen et al., “Milestones in autonomous driving and intelligent
vehicles: Survey of surveys,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Vehicles, vol. 8, no. 2,
pp. 1046–1056, Feb. 2023.
[17] C. Olaverri-Monreal, “Promoting trust in self-driving vehicles,” Nature
Electron., vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 292–294, Jun. 2020.
[18] F.-Y . Wang, “Computational transportation and transportation 5.0,”
IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 5, no. 15, pp. 1861–1868,
2014.
[19] F.-Y . Wang, “A five-year report on transportation 5.0: Smart soci-
eties with smart logistics and mobility,” IEEE ITSS TC Trans. 5.0,
Tech. Rep., Sep. 2018.
[20] F.-Y . Wang, Y . Yuan, X. Wang, and R. Qin, “Societies 5.0: A new
paradigm for computational social systems research,” IEEE Trans.
Computat. Social Syst., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 2–8, Mar. 2018.
[21] F.-Y . Wang, “Control 5.0: From Newton to Merton in popper’s cyber-
social-physical spaces,” IEEE/CAA J. Autom. Sinica, vol. 3, no. 3,
pp. 233–234, Jul. 2016.
[22] F.-Y . Wang, Y . Gao, X. Shang, and J. Zhang, “Parallel manufacturing
and industries 5.0: From virtual manufacturing to intelligent manufac-
turing,” Sci. Technol. Rev., vol. 36, no. 21, pp. 10–22, 2018.
[23] J. Deng, F.-Y . Wang, Y . Chen, and X. Zhao, “From industries 4.0 to
energy 5.0: Concept and framework of intelligent energy systems,”Acta
Autom. Sinica, vol. 41, no. 12, pp. 2003–2016, 2015.
[24] F. Wang et al., “Nuclear energy 5.0: New formation and system
architecture of nuclear power industry in the new IT era,” Acta Autom.
Sinica, vol. 44, no. 5, pp. 922–934, 2018.
[25] F.-Y . Wang, “Intelligence 5.0: Parallel intelligence in parallel age,”
J. China Soc. Sci. Tech. Inf., vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 563–574,
Jun. 2015.
[26] Y . Yuan, F. Wang, J. Li, and R. Qin, “A survey on real time bidding
advertising,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Service Oper. Logistics, Infor-
mat., Oct. 2014, pp. 418–423.
[27] F.-Y . Wang, “CC 5.0: Intelligent command and control systems in
the parallel age,” J. Command Control, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 107–120,
2015.
[28] F.-Y . Wang and Y . Gao,Advanced Studies of Flexible Robotic Manipu-
lators: Modeling, Design, Control and Applications, vol. 4. Singapore:
World Scientific, 2003.
[29] F.-Y . Wang, “New control paradigm for industry 5.0: From big models
to foundation control and management,” IEEE/CAA J. Autom. Sinica,
vol. 10, no. 8, pp. 1643–1646, Aug. 2023.
[30] X. Wang et al., “Steps toward industry 5.0: Building ‘6s’ parallel
industries with cyber-physical-social intelligence,”IEEE/CAA J. Autom.
Sinica, vol. 10, no. 8, pp. 1692–1703, Aug. 2023.
[31] F.-Y . Wang, J. Yang, X. Wang, J. Li, and Q.-L. Han, “Chat with
ChatGPT on industry 5.0: Learning and decision-making for intelligent
industries,” IEEE/CAA J. Autom. Sinica, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 831–834,
Apr. 2023.
[32] Y . Lin, X. Na, D. Wang, X. Dai, and F.-Y . Wang, “Mobility 5.0:
Smart logistics and transportation services in cyber-physical-social
systems,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Vehicles, vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 3527–3532,
Jun. 2023.
[33] E. L. Trist and K. W. Bamforth, “Some social and psychological
consequences of the longwall method of coal-getting: An examination
of the psychological situation and defences of a work group in relation
to the social structure and technological content of the work system,”
Hum. Relations, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 3–38, Feb. 1951.
[34] J. W. Stranks, Human Factors and Behavioural Safety. Evanston, IL,
USA: Routledge, 2007.
[35] F. W. Geels, “From sectoral systems of innovation to socio-technical
systems: Insights about dynamics and change from sociology and
institutional theory,” Res. Policy, vol. 33, nos. 6–7, pp. 897–920, 2004.
[36] S. O. Funtowicz and J. R. Ravetz, “Science for the post-normal age,”
Futures, vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 739–755, Sep. 1993.
[37] J. H. Holland, “Studying complex adaptive systems,” J. Syst. Sci.
Complex., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 1–8, Mar. 2006.
[38] R. Cooper and M. Foster, “Sociotechnical systems,” Amer. Psycholog.,
vol. 26, no. 5, p. 467, 1971.
[39] C. Marchetti, “Anthropological invariants in travel behavior,” Technol.
Forecasting Social Change, vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 75–88, Sep. 1994.
[40] J. Clutton-Brock, Horse Power: A History of the Horse and the Donkey
in Human Societies. Washington, DC, USA: Natural History Museum
Publications, 1992.
[41] K. Small, Urban Transportation Economics, vol. 4. Oxford, U.K.:
Taylor & Francis, 2013.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 11:37:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 14 =====

W ANG et al.: TRANSPORTATION 5.0: THE DAO TO SAFE, SECURE, AND SUSTAINABLE ITS 10275
[42] D. A. Badoe and E. J. Miller, “Transportation–land-use interaction:
Empirical findings in North America, and their implications for mod-
eling,” Transp. Res. D, Transp. Environ., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 235–263,
Jul. 2000.
[43] D. G. Douglas, The Social Construction of Technological Systems,
Anniversary Edition: New Directions in the Sociology and History of
Technology. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2012.
[44] K. Lucas, “Providing transport for social inclusion within a framework
for environmental justice in the U.K.,” Transp. Res. A, Policy Pract.,
vol. 40, no. 10, pp. 801–809, Dec. 2006.
[45] D. Zorovic, “International regulations for preventing collisions at sea
(COLREGs) amendment proposal,” J. Maritime Transp. Sci., vol. 55,
no. 1, pp. 229–230, Jan. 2019.
[46] R. Abeyratne, “Convention on international civil aviation,” in A Com-
mentary. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2014.
[47] L. M. Surhone, M. T. Tennoe, and S. F. Henssonow, Vienna Convention
on Road Signs and Signals . Riga, Latvia: Betascript Publishing, 2013.
[48] K. Martens, Transport Justice: Designing Fair Transportation Systems.
Evanston, IL, USA: Routledge, 2016.
[49] D. Banister, “The sustainable mobility paradigm,” Transp. Policy,
vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 73–80, Mar. 2008.
[50] R. Willson, “Assessing communicative rationality as a transportation
planning paradigm,” Transportation, vol. 28, pp. 1–31, Feb. 2001.
[51] M. Kamargianni, W. Li, M. Matyas, and A. Schäfer, “A critical review
of new mobility services for urban transport,” Transp. Res. Proc.,
vol. 14, pp. 3294–3303, Jan. 2016.
[52] E. Kopits and M. Cropper, “Traffic fatalities and economic
growth,” Accident Anal. Prevention, vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 169–178,
Jan. 2005.
[53] A. Auer, S. Feese, S. Lockwood, and B. A. Hamilton, “History of
intelligent transportation systems,” United States. Dept. Transp., Intell.
Transp. Syst. Joint Program Office, Tech. Rep. FHW A-JPO-16-329,
2016.
[54] X. Zhang et al., “Road traffic injuries among riders of electric
bike/electric moped in southern China,” Traffic Injury Prevention,
vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 417–422, May 2018.
[55] J. Allen et al., “Understanding the impact of e-commerce on last-
mile light goods vehicle activity in urban areas: The case of
London,” Transp. Res. D, Transp. Environ. , vol. 61, pp. 325–338,
Jun. 2018.
[56] E. Brynjolfsson and A. McAfee, The Second Machine Age: Work,
Progress, and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies. New York,
NY , USA: WW Norton & Company, 2014.
[57] R. Doede, “What technology wants,” Tradition Discovery, Polanyi Soc.
Periodical, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 71–74, 2010.
[58] C. C. Chan, “An overview of electric vehicle technology,” Proc. IEEE,
vol. 81, no. 9, pp. 1202–1213, Sep. 1993.
[59] X. Sun, Z. Li, X. Wang, and C. Li, “Technology development
of electric vehicles: A review,” Energies, vol. 13, no. 1, p. 90,
Dec. 2019.
[60] S. Manzetti and F. Mariasiu, “Electric vehicle battery technologies:
From present state to future systems,” Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev.,
vol. 51, pp. 1004–1012, Nov. 2015.
[61] D. McNaughton and J. Light, “The iPad and mobile technology revolu-
tion: Benefits and challenges for individuals who require augmentative
and alternative communication,” Augmentative Alternative Commun.,
vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 107–116, Jun. 2013.
[62] M. Castells, M. Fernandez-Ardevol, J. L. Qiu, and A. Sey, Mobile
Communication and Society: A Global Perspective. Cambridge, MA,
USA: MIT Press, 2009.
[63] Y . Wu, X. Wang, S. Hong, M. Hong, M. Pei, and Y . Su, “The
relationship between social short-form videos and youth’s well-being:
It depends on usage types and content categories,” Psychol. Popular
Media, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 467–477, Oct. 2021.
[64] A. Kalogeropoulos, F. Cherubini, and N. Newman, “The future of
online news video,” Digit. News Project, 2016.
[65] D. Das, L. Sahoo, and S. Datta, “A survey on recommendation system,”
Int. J. Comput. Appl., vol. 160, no. 7, pp. 6–10, 2017.
[66] L. Deng, “Artificial intelligence in the rising wave of deep learning:
The historical path and future outlook [perspectives],” IEEE Signal
Process. Mag., vol. 35, no. 1, p. 180, Jan. 2018.
[67] L. Deng, G. Hinton, and B. Kingsbury, “New types of deep neural
network learning for speech recognition and related applications: An
overview,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process. ,
May 2013, pp. 8599–8603.
[68] J. Ker, L. Wang, J. Rao, and T. Lim, “Deep learning applications
in medical image analysis,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 9375–9389,
2018.
[69] X. Liu, J. Liang, and B. Xu, “A deep learning method for lane
changing situation assessment and decision making,” IEEE Access,
vol. 7, pp. 133749–133759, 2019.
[70] J. Wang and R. Zhang, “Research on the influencing fac-
tors of the user information cocoon effect of short video plat-
forms based on personalized recommendation algorithms,” in Proc.
2nd Int. Conf. Big Data Eng. Educ. (BDEE), Aug. 2022,
pp. 53–60.
[71] K. Su, J. Li, and H. Fu, “Smart city and the applications,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Electron., Commun. Control (ICECC), Sep. 2011,
pp. 1028–1031.
[72] T. Jeong and D.-H. Seol, “Theoretical construction of a frag-
mented society,” J. Asian Sociol., vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 97–128,
2022.
[73] G. P. Dwyer, “The economics of Bitcoin and similar private
digital currencies,” J. Financial Stability, vol. 17, pp. 81–91,
Apr. 2015.
[74] A. Piechucka, “Fifteen minutes of fame, fame in fifteen minutes:
Andy Warhol and the dawn of modern-day celebrity culture,”
Tech. Rep., 2014. [Online]. Available: https://depot.ceon.pl/
bitstream/handle/123456789/8734/08_pjas8.pdf?sequence=1
[75] F.-Y . Wang, “The metaverse of mind: Perspectives on DeSci for
DeEco and DeSoc,” IEEE/CAA J. Autom. Sinica, vol. 9, no. 12,
pp. 2043–2046, Dec. 2022.
[76] P. Ye and F.-Y . Wang, “Parallel population and parallel human—A
cyber-physical social approach,” IEEE Intell. Syst., vol. 37, no. 5,
pp. 19–27, Sep. 2022.
[77] S. Madakam, R. Ramaswamy, and S. Tripathi, “Internet of Things
(IoT): A literature review,” J. Comput. Commun., vol. 3, no. 5, p. 164,
2015.
[78] S. Sagiroglu and D. Sinanc, “Big data: A review,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Collaboration Technol. Syst. (CTS), May 2013, pp. 42–47.
[79] D. L. Rubinfeld and M. S. Gal, “Access barriers to big data,” Ariz. L.
Rev., vol. 59, p. 339, Jan. 2017.
[80] A. Muschalle, F. Stahl, A. Löser, and G. V ossen, “Pricing
approaches for data markets,” in Proc. Int. Workshop Business
Intell. Real-Time Enterprise , Istanbul, Turkey: Springer, Aug. 2012,
pp. 129–144.
[81] O. Terzo, P. Ruiu, E. Bucci, and F. Xhafa, “Data as a service (DaaS)
for sharing and processing of large data collections in the cloud,” in
Proc. 7th Int. Conf. Complex, Intell., Softw. Intensive Syst., Jul. 2013,
pp. 475–480.
[82] M. Nazarov, “Modern media landscape: Diversity and fragmenta-
tion,” Sotsiologicheskie Issledovaniya, vol. 14, no. 8, pp. 54–64,
2018.
[83] M. Eichler and C. F. Daganzo, “Bus lanes with intermittent
priority: Strategy formulae and an evaluation,” Transp. Res. B,
Methodol., vol. 40, no. 9, pp. 731–744, Nov. 2006. [Online]. Available:
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0191261505001104
[84] V . Astarita, V . P. Giofrè, G. Guido, and A. Vitale, “The use of adaptive
traffic signal systems based on floating car data,” Wireless Commun.
Mobile Comput., vol. 2017, pp. 1–13, May 2017. [Online]. Available:
https://www.hindawi.com/journals/wcmc/2017/4617451/
[85] Q. Miao, Y . Lv, M. Huang, X. Wang, and F.-Y . Wang, “Par-
allel learning: Overview and perspective for computational learn-
ing across Syn2Real and Sim2Real,” IEEE/CAA J. Autom. Sinica,
vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 603–631, Mar. 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10057176/
[86] R. Xu et al., “The OpenCDA open-source ecosystem for cooperative
driving automation research,”IEEE Trans. Intell. Vehicles, vol. 8, no. 4,
pp. 2698–2711, Apr. 2023.
[87] X. Han et al., “Strategic and tactical decision-making for cooperative
vehicle platooning with organized behavior on multi-lane highways,”
Transp. Res. C, Emerg. Technol., vol. 145, Dec. 2022, Art. no. 103952.
[88] Y . Guo and J. Ma, “SCoPTO: Signalized corridor management with
vehicle platooning and trajectory control under connected and auto-
mated traffic environment,” Transportmetrica B, Transp. Dyn., vol. 9,
no. 1, pp. 673–692, Jan. 2021.
[89] R. Xu, H. Xiang, Z. Tu, X. Xia, M.-H. Yang, and J. Ma, “V2X-ViT:
Vehicle-to-everything cooperative perception with vision transformer,”
in Computer Vision ECCV 2022. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2022,
pp. 107–124.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 11:37:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 15 =====

10276 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 24, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2023
[90] P. A. Ioannou, Automated Highway Systems, University of South-
ern California. Center for Advanced Transportation Technologies.
New York, NY , USA: Plenum Press, 1997.
[91] P. Ioannou and H. Jula, “Automated container terminal concepts,” in
Intelligent Freight Transportation. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press,
2008, pp. 7–33.
[92] L. Zhu, F. R. Yu, Y . Wang, B. Ning, and T. Tang, “Big data analytics
in intelligent transportation systems: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
Transp. Syst., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 383–398, Jan. 2019. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8344848/
[93] S. De, Y . Zhou, I. Larizgoitia Abad, and K. Moessner, “Cyber–
physical–social frameworks for urban big data systems: A survey,”
Appl. Sci., vol. 7, no. 10, p. 1017, Oct. 2017. [Online]. Available:
http://www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/7/10/1017
[94] C. Zhao, Y . Lv, J. Jin, Y . Tian, J. Wang, and F.-Y . Wang, “DeCAST
in TransVerse for parallel intelligent transportation systems and
smart cities: Three decades and beyond,” IEEE Intell. Transp. Syst.
Mag., vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 6–17, Nov. 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9896812/
[95] X. Xia et al., “An automated driving systems data acquisition and ana-
lytics platform,” Transp. Res. C, Emerg. Technol., vol. 151, Jun. 2023,
Art. no. 104120. [Online]. Available: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/
retrieve/pii/S0968090X23001092
[96] A. D. May, Traffic Flow Fundamentals. Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA:
Prentice-Hall.
[97] P. A. Lopez et al., “Microscopic traffic simulation using SUMO,”
in Proc. 21st Int. Conf. Intell. Transp. Syst. (ITSC), Nov. 2018,
pp. 2575–2582. [Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.
org/document/8569938/
[98] H. Zhang et al., “CityFlow: A multi-agent reinforcement learning
environment for large scale city traffic scenario,” in Proc. World Wide
Web Conf., May 2019, pp. 3620–3624, doi: 10.1145/3308558.3314139.
[99] H. Andreas, N. Kai, and A. W. Kay, Introducing MATSim. Zurich,
Switzerland: ETH Zurich, 2016. [Online]. Available: http://hdl.
handle.net/20.500.11850/164522
[100] R. Xu, Y . Guo, X. Han, X. Xia, H. Xiang, and J. Ma, “OpenCDA:
An open cooperative driving automation framework integrated with
co-simulation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Intell. Transp. Syst. Conf. (ITSC),
Sep. 2021, pp. 1155–1162.
[101] J. Nguyen, S. T. Powers, N. Urquhart, T. Farrenkopf, and M. Guckert,
“An overview of agent-based traffic simulators,” Transp. Res. Interdis-
cipl. Perspect., vol. 12, Dec. 2021, Art. no. 100486. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2590198221001913
[102] W. Fan, P. Chen, D. Shi, X. Guo, and L. Kou, “Multi-agent
modeling and simulation in the AI age,” Tsinghua Sci. Tech-
nol., vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 608–624, Oct. 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9409754/
[103] C. Zhao, X. Dai, Y . Lv, Y . Tian, Y . Ren, and F.-Y . Wang, “Foundation
models for transportation intelligence: ITS convergence in TransVerse,”
IEEE Intell. Syst., vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 77–82, Nov. 2022. [Online].
Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10044573/
[104] Y . Chen, Y . Lv, and F.-Y . Wang, “Traffic flow imputation using parallel
data and generative adversarial networks,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp.
Syst., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 1624–1630, Apr. 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8699108/
[105] Y . Du, F. Wei, Z. Zhang, M. Shi, Y . Gao, and G. Li, “Learning
to prompt for open-vocabulary object detection with vision-language
model,” 2022, arXiv:2203.14940.
[106] F.-Y . Wang, “Parallel control and management for intelligent trans-
portation systems: Concepts, architectures, and applications,” IEEE
Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 630–638, Sep. 2010.
[107] D. Wang et al., “TransworldNG: Traffic simulation via foundation
model,” in Proc. IEEE 26th Int. Conf. Intell. Transp. Syst. (ITSC),
May 2023.
[108] X. Wang, D. Wang, L. Chen, and Y . Lin, “Building transportation
foundation model via generative graph transformer,” in Proc. IEEE
26th Int. Conf. Intell. Transp. Syst. (ITSC), May 2023.
[109] M. Papageorgiou, C. Diakaki, V . Dinopoulou, A. Kotsialos, and
Y . Wang, “Review of road traffic control strategies,” Proc. IEEE,
vol. 91, no. 12, pp. 2043–2067, Dec. 2003.
[110] W. Liu, X. Xia, L. Xiong, Y . Lu, L. Gao, and Z. Yu, “Automated vehicle
sideslip angle estimation considering signal measurement characteris-
tic,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 21, no. 19, pp. 21675–21687, Oct. 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9556130/
[111] D. H. Wolpert and K. Tumer, “Collective intelligence, data routing
and Braess’ paradox,” J. Artif. Intell. Res., vol. 16, pp. 359–387,
Jun. 2002.
[112] C. Diakaki, M. Papageorgiou, I. Papamichail, and I. Nikolos,
“Overview and analysis of vehicle automation and communication
systems from a motorway traffic management perspective,” Transp.
Res. A, Policy Pract., vol. 75, pp. 147–165, May 2015.
[113] A. Kouvelas, K. Aboudolas, E. B. Kosmatopoulos, and
M. Papageorgiou, “Adaptive performance optimization for large-
scale traffic control systems,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 1434–1445, Dec. 2011.
[114] J. Jin, H. Guo, J. Xu, X. Wang, and F.-Y . Wang, “An end-to-end
recommendation system for urban traffic controls and management
under a parallel learning framework,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 1616–1626, Mar. 2021.
[115] C. Roncoli, M. Papageorgiou, and I. Papamichail, “Traffic flow
optimisation in presence of vehicle automation and communi-
cation systems—Part II: Optimal control for multi-lane motor-
ways,” Transp. Res. C, Emerg. Technol., vol. 57, pp. 260–275,
Aug. 2015.
[116] V . Milanés, S. E. Shladover, J. Spring, C. Nowakowski, H. Kawazoe,
and M. Nakamura, “Cooperative adaptive cruise control in real traf-
fic situations,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 15, no. 1,
pp. 296–305, Feb. 2014.
[117] C. Yu, Y . Feng, H. X. Liu, W. Ma, and X. Yang, “Integrated
optimization of traffic signals and vehicle trajectories at isolated
urban intersections,” Transp. Res. B, Methodol., vol. 112, pp. 89–112,
Jun. 2018.
[118] Q. Guo, L. Li, and X. (Jeff) Ban, “Urban traffic signal control with
connected and automated vehicles: A survey,” Transp. Res. C, Emerg.
Technol., vol. 101, pp. 313–334, Apr. 2019.
[119] Y . Yuan and F.-Y . Wang, “Towards blockchain-based intelligent trans-
portation systems,” in Proc. IEEE 19th Int. Conf. Intell. Transp. Syst.
(ITSC), Nov. 2016, pp. 2663–2668.
[120] X. Liang et al., “TAO-based data governance in intelligent transporta-
tion systems,” in Proc. 26th Int. Conf. Intell. Transp. Syst. (ITSC),
Sep. 2023.
[121] J. Li et al., “From DAO to TAO: Finding the essence of decen-
tralization,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Syst. Man, Cybern. (SMC),
Oct. 2023.
[122] F.-Y . Wang, “The DAO to MetaControl for MetaSystems in metaverses:
The system of parallel control systems for knowledge automation and
control intelligence in CPSS,” IEEE/CAA J. Autom. Sinica, vol. 9,
no. 11, pp. 1899–1908, Nov. 2022.
[123] J. Li et al., “True autonomous organizations and operations for Web3,”
J. Cyber-Phys.-Social Intell., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–8, 2023.
[124] S. Yao et al., “Towards integrated traffic control with operating decen-
tralized autonomous organization,” in Proc. IEEE 26th Int. Conf. Intell.
Transp. Syst. (ITSC), Jul. 2023.
[125] C. Zhao, X. Dai, Y . Lv, J. Niu, and Y . Lin, “Decentralized
autonomous operations and organizations in TransVerse: Federated
intelligence for smart mobility,” IEEE Trans. Syst. Man, Cybern.
Syst., vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 2062–2072, Apr. 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9996183/
[126] X. Li, P. Ye, J. Li, Z. Liu, L. Cao, and F.-Y . Wang, “From fea-
tures engineering to scenarios engineering for trustworthy AI: I&I,
C&C, and V&V ,” IEEE Intell. Syst., vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 18–26,
Jul. 2022.
[127] F.-Y . Wang, “Parallel intelligence in metaverses: Welcome to Hanoi!”
IEEE Intell. Syst., vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 16–20, Jan. 2022.
[128] L. Li et al., “Parallel testing of vehicle intelligence via virtual-real
interaction,” Sci. Robot., vol. 4, no. 28, Mar. 2019, Art. no. eaaw4106,
doi: 10.1126/scirobotics.aaw4106.
[129] L. Li et al., “Artificial intelligence test: A case study of intel-
ligent vehicles,” Artif. Intell. Rev., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 441–465,
Oct. 2018.
[130] L. Li, Y . Lin, Y . Wang, and F.-Y . Wang, “Simulation driven AI: From
artificial to actual and vice versa,” IEEE Intell. Syst., vol. 38, no. 1,
pp. 3–8, Jan. 2023.
[131] L. Li et al., “Three principles to determine the right-of-way for
A Vs: Safe interaction with humans,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 7759–7774, Jul. 2022.
[132] B. Maas, “Literature review of mobility as a service,” Sustain-
ability, vol. 14, no. 14, p. 8962, Jul. 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/14/14/8962
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 11:37:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 16 =====

W ANG et al.: TRANSPORTATION 5.0: THE DAO TO SAFE, SECURE, AND SUSTAINABLE ITS 10277
[133] W. Kriswardhana and D. Esztergár-Kiss, “A systematic litera-
ture review of mobility as a service: Examining the socio-
technical factors in MaaS adoption and bundling packages,” Travel
Behaviour Soc., vol. 31, pp. 232–243, Apr. 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2214367X22001478
[134] F.-Y . Wang, J. Li, R. Qin, J. Zhu, H. Mo, and B. Hu, “ChatGPT
for computational social systems: From conversational applications
to human-oriented operating systems,” IEEE Trans. Computat. Social
Syst., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 414–425, Apr. 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10089798/
Fei-Yue Wang (Fellow, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree in computer and systems engineering
from the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY ,
USA, in 1990. He joined The University of Arizona
in 1990 and became a Professor and the Director
of the Robotics and Automation Laboratory and
the Program in Advanced Research for Complex
Systems. In 1999, he founded the Intelligent Con-
trol and Systems Engineering Center, Institute of
Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Beijing, China, under the support of the Outstanding
Chinese Talents Program from the State Planning Council. In 2002, he was
appointed as the Director of the Key Laboratory for Complex Systems and
Intelligence Science, CAS, where he was the Vice President of the Institute of
Automation, in 2006. He found CAS Center for Social Computing and Parallel
Management in 2008, and became the State Specially Appointed Expert
and the Founding Director of the State Key Laboratory for Management
and Control of Complex Systems in 2011. His current research focuses on
methods and applications for parallel intelligence, social computing, DeSci,
and knowledge automation.
He is a fellow of INCOSE, IFAC, ASME, and AAAS. In 2007, he received
the National Prize in Natural Sciences of China and numerous best papers
awards from IEEE T RANSACTIONS . He became an Outstanding Scientist of
ACM for his work in intelligent control and social computing. He received
the IEEE ITS Outstanding Application and Research Awards in 2009,
2011, and 2015; and the IEEE SMC Norbert Wiener Award in 2014.
Since 1997, he has been serving as the general chair or the program
chair for over 30 IEEE, INFORMS, IFAC, ACM, and ASME conferences.
He was the President of the IEEE ITS Society, from 2005 to 2007; the
IEEE Council of RFID, from 2019 to 2021; the Chinese Association for
Science and Technology, USA, in 2005; the American Zhu Kezhen Education
Foundation, from 2007 to 2008. He was the Vice President of the ACM China
Council, from 2010 to 2011; and the IEEE Systems, Man, and Cybernetics
Society, from 2019 to 2021. He was the Vice President and the Secretary
General of the Chinese Association of Automation, from 2008 to 2018.
He was the Founding Editor-in-Chief (EiC) of the International Journal of
Intelligent Control and Systems, from 1995 to 2000; IEEE Intelligent Trans-
portation Systems Magazine, from 2006 to 2007; IEEE/CAA J OURNAL OF
AUTOMATICA SINICA , from 2014 to 2017; China’s Journal of Command and
Control, from 2015 to 2021; and China’s Journal of Intelligent Science and
Technology, from 2019 to 2021. He was the EiC of the IEEE I NTELLIGENT
SYSTEMS , from 2009 to 2012, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT
TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS , from 2009 to 2016, and IEEE T RANSACTIONS
ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS , from 2017 to 2020. Currently,
he is the President of the CAA’s Supervision Council, and the EiC of IEEE
TRANSACTION ON INTELLIGENT VEHICLES . He became the IFAC Pavel J.
Nowacki Distinguished Lecturer in 2021.
Yilun Lin (Member, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree in control science and engineering
from the State Key Laboratory of Management
and Control for Complex Systems, Institute
of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
(CASIA), China, in 2019. He was an Assistant
Professor with the State Key Laboratory for
Management and Control of Complex Systems,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, from 2019 to 2020;
and a Senior Algorithm Engineer with the Ant
Group, from 2020 to 2022. He is currently a
Research Scientist and the Principal Investigator of the Urban Computing
Laboratory, Shanghai AI Laboratory. His research interests include social
computing, urban computing, intelligent transportation systems, deep
learning, reinforcement learning, and privacy-preserving computing.
Petros A. Ioannou (Life Fellow, IEEE) received
the B.Sc. degree (Hons.) from University Col-
lege London, U.K., in 1978, and the M.S. and
Ph.D. degrees from the University of Illinois
Urbana–Champaign, Urbana–Champaign, IL, USA,
in 1980 and 1982, respectively. In 1982, he joined
the Department of Electrical Engineering-Systems,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles,
CA, USA. He is currently a Professor and the
A V “Bal” Balakrishnan Chair with the Department
of Electrical Engineering-Systems, the Director of
the Center of Advanced Transportation Technologies, and the Associate
Director of research with METRANS. He also holds a courtesy appointment
with the Department of Aerospace and Mechanical Engineering. He is the
author/coauthor of nine books and over 400 papers in the areas of control,
dynamics, and intelligent transportation systems. In 2022, he was inducted to
the National Academy of Engineering. His research interests are in the areas
of adaptive control, neural networks, nonlinear systems, vehicle dynamics and
control, intelligent transportation systems, and marine transportation. He is a
fellow of IFAC and AAAS.
Ljubo Vlacic (Life Senior Member, IEEE) received
the Graduate Diploma degree in electrical engineer-
ing and the M.Phil. and Ph.D. degrees in control
systems engineering from the University of Sarajevo,
Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, in 1973, 1976,
and 1986, respectively. He also received the Conser-
vatorium of Music (Violin) from the University of
Sarajevo, in 1976. He is a control systems scientist
and a practitioner, renowned for his contributions
to co-operative driverless vehicles and intelligent
control systems research and development. He has
held a number of leading roles in both industry and academia. He is
currently with the Institute for Integrated and Intelligent Systems, Griffith
University, QLD, Australia. He was a recipient of 22 awards, including the
IEEE Achievement Medal (world-wide), the Sir Lionel Hooke Award, the
Queensland Professional Engineer of the Year Award, and the Gold Coast
Business Events Ambassador Award. He has organized and hosted 12 national
and international scientific conferences. His research achievements made news
headlines and were broadcast through media outlets throughout the world.
He is the Chair of the IET Queensland Local Network and the IET Australia
Forum. He is the Editor-in-Chief of IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems
Magazine. He played Violin with professional Symphony Orchestra.
Xiaoming Liu received the bachelor’s degree in
traffic engineering from Southeast University and
the master’s degree in transportation engineering
from the Beijing University of Technology. He is
a Professor of transportation engineering with the
Beijing University of Technology. He has pub-
lished 15 books and over 150 academic papers.
His research has applied to major events, such as
the Beijing Olympics and the Asia–Africa Forum.
His research interests are centered on transportation
engineering, with a particular focus on traffic behav-
ior theory, transportation planning, and multimodal transport.
He is a Traffic Advisor of the Beijing Municipal Government, the Vice
President of the China Association for Transportation Science and Technology,
a Council Member and the Deputy Director of the Youth Expert Committee
for the China Highway and Transportation Society, and the Deputy Director
of the Academic Committee of the Urban Planning Society of China. He has
received awards, including the Eighth China Youth Science and Technology
Award, the Second Prize of the National Scientific and Technological Progress
Award in 2002, numerous Second and Third Prizes of the Beijing Science and
Technology Progress Awards, and the Second Prize of the China Highway and
Transportation Society’s Science and Technology Progress Award. He was
selected as one of the first Beijing Youth Science and Technology Stars
in 1993. He was also among the first group of individuals selected for the
National “Hundred, Thousand, and Ten Thousand Talents Project” in 1996.
In 2000, he was chosen as one of the top talents of the Ministry of Transport’s
Cross-Century Talent Project. In 2002, he was selected for the Ministry of
Education’s Cross-Century Talent Project.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 11:37:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 17 =====

10278 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 24, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2023
Azim Eskandarian (Senior Member, IEEE)
received the B.S. and D.Sc. degrees in mechanical
engineering from George Washington University
(GWU), Washington, DC, USA, and the M.S. degree
in mechanical engineering from Virginia Tech (VT),
Blacksburg, V A, USA. He was a Professor of
engineering and applied science with GWU,
and the Founding Director of the Center for
Intelligent Systems Research, from 1996 to 2015.
From 2002 to 2015, he was the Director of the
Transportation Safety and Security University
Area of Excellence. In 1992, he was the Co-Founder of the National
Crash Analysis Center, where he was the Director, from 1998 to 2002 and
2013 to 2015. He was an Assistant Professor with The Pennsylvania
State University, State College, PA, USA, from 1989 to 1992; and the
engineer/project manager with industry, from 1983 to 1989. Since 2015,
he has been a Professor and the Head of the Mechanical Engineering
Department, VT. In 2018, he became the Nicholas and Rebecca Des
Champs Chaired Professor. He has established the Autonomous Systems
and Intelligent Machines Laboratory, VT, to conduct research on intelligent
and autonomous vehicles and mobile robots. He is a fellow of ASME and a
member of SAE professional societies. He was a recipient of the IEEE ITS
Society’s Outstanding Researcher Award in 2017 and the GWU’s School of
Engineering Outstanding Researcher Award in 2013.
Yisheng Lv (Senior Member, IEEE) is a Professor
with the State Key Laboratory for Management and
Control of Complex Systems, Institute of Automa-
tion, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
He is also with the University of the Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing. His research inter-
ests include artificial intelligence for transportation,
intelligent vehicles, and parallel traffic management
and control systems.
Xiaoxiang Na (Member, IEEE) received the B.Sc.
and M.Sc. degrees in automotive engineering from
the College of Automotive Engineering, Jilin Uni-
versity, China, in 2007 and 2009, respectively,
and the Ph.D. degree in driver-vehicle dynamics
from the Department of Engineering, University
of Cambridge, U.K., in 2014. He is currently a
University Assistant Professor of applied mechanics
with the Department of Engineering, University of
Cambridge. From 2014 to 2023, he was a Research
Associate and later a Senior Research Associate with
the Centre for Sustainable Road Freight (SRF), University of Cambridge. His
main research interests include driver-vehicle dynamics, in-service monitoring
of heavy goods vehicle (HGV) operations, and assessment and modeling of
HGV energy performance.
David Cebon (Member, IEEE) received the
B.E. degree in mechanical engineering from the
University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia,
in 1980, and the Ph.D. degree in engineering from
the University of Cambridge, Cambridge, U.K.,
in 1985. Since 1985, he has been with the Depart-
ment of Engineering, University of Cambridge,
where he is currently a Professor of mechanical
engineering. He is a fellow of the Royal Academy of
Engineering. He is also the Director of the Centre for
Sustainable Road Freight and the Cambridge Vehicle
Dynamics Consortium. He also leads the research theme energy, transport,
and urban infrastructure with the Department of Engineering, University of
Cambridge. His research interests include mechanical, civil, materials, and
energy aspects of road transport engineering.
Jiaqi Ma (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree
in transportation engineering from the University
of Virginia, Charlottesville, V A, USA, in 2014.
He is currently an Associate Professor with the
Samueli School of Engineering, UCLA, where he
is also the Faculty Lead of the New Mobility
Program, Institute of Transportation Studies. His
research interests include intelligent transportation
systems, autonomous driving, and cooperative driv-
ing automation. He is a member of the TRB Stand-
ing Committee on Vehicle-Highway Automation, the
TRB Standing Committee on Artificial Intelligence and Advanced Computing
Applications, and the American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) Connected
and Autonomous Vehicles Impacts Committee. He is the Co-Chair of the IEEE
ITS Society Technical Committee on Smart Mobility and Transportation 5.0.
He is the Editor-in-Chief of the IEEE O PEN JOURNAL OF INTELLIGENT
TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS .
Lingxi Li (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering
from the University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign
in 2008. He is a Professor with the Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue
School of Engineering and Technology, Indiana
University–Purdue University Indianapolis (IUPUI),
USA. He has authored/coauthored one book and
over 140 research articles in refereed journals and
conferences. His current research focuses on the
modeling, analysis, control, and optimization of
complex systems, connected and automated vehicles, intelligent transportation
systems, digital twins and parallel intelligence, and human–machine inter-
action. He was a recipient of five best paper awards, the 2021 IEEE ITSS
Outstanding Application Award, the 2017 Outstanding Research Contributions
Award, the 2012 T-ITS Outstanding Editorial Service Award, and several
university research/teaching awards. He has served as the general chair, the
program chair, and the program co-chair for more than 20 international
conferences. He is currently serving as an associate editor for five renowned
international journals.
Cristina Olaverri-Monreal received the
Ph.D. degree from Ludwig-Maximilians University
(LMU), Munich, in cooperation with BMW. She
is a Professor and the BMK Endowed Chair of
sustainable transport logistics 4.0 with Johannes
Kepler University Linz, Austria. Prior to this
position, she led diverse teams in industry and in
academia in the U.S. and in distinct countries in
Europe. Her research aims at studying solutions for
an efficient and effective transportation focusing
on minimizing the barrier between users and road
systems. To this end, she relies on the automation, wireless communication,
and sensing technologies, that pertains to the field of ITS.
She is a member of the EU-wide platform for coordinating open road
tests [Cooperative, Connected, and Automated Mobility (CCAM)] and a
representative of the European technology platform “Alliance for Logistics
Innovation Through Collaboration in Europe” (ALICE) for the “Workgroup
Road Safety” (WG4: EU-CCAM-WG-ROAD-SAFETY@ec.europa.eu). She
received the IEEE Educational Activities Board Meritorious Achievement
Award in Continuing Education for her dedicated contribution to continuing
education in the field of ITS. She is the President of the IEEE Intelligent
Transportation Systems Society (IEEE ITSS), a Founder and the Chair
of the Austrian IEEE ITSS Chapter, and the Chair of the Technical
Activities Committee (TAC) on human factors in intelligent transportation
systems (ITS). In 2017, she was the General Chair of the IEEE International
Conference on Vehicles Electronics and Safety (ICVES’2017). Furthermore,
she is an Expert for the European Commission on “Automated Road
Transport” and a consultant and a project evaluator in the field of ICT
and connected, cooperative autonomous mobility systems for various EU
and national agencies and organizations in Germany, Sweden, France, and
Ireland. She is a Senior Editor/an Associate Editor and a Editorial Board
Member of several journals in the field, including the IEEE T RANSACTIONS
ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS and IEEE Intelligent
Transportation Systems Magazine.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 11:37:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 