

===== PAGE 1 =====

1132 IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 15, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015
Vehicle Detection and Classiﬁcation for Low-Speed
Congested Trafﬁc With Anisotropic
Magnetoresistive Sensor
Bo Yang and Yiqun Lei
Abstract— A vehicle detection and classiﬁcation system has
been developed based on a low-cost triaxial anisotropic mag-
netoresistive sensor. Considering the characteristics of vehicle
magnetic detection signals, especially the signals for low-speed
congested trafﬁc in large cities, a novel ﬁxed threshold state
machine algorithm based on signal variance is proposed to detect
vehicles within a single lane and segment the vehicle signals
effectively according to the time information of vehicles entering
and leaving the sensor monitoring area. In our experiments, ﬁve
signal features are extracted, including the signal duration, signal
energy, average energy of the signal, ratio of positive and negative
energy of x-axis signal, and ratio of positive and negative energy
of y-axis signal. Furthermore, the detected vehicles are classiﬁed
into motorcycles, two-box cars, saloon cars, buses, and Sport
Utility Vehicle commercial vehicles based on a classiﬁcation tree
model. The experimental results have shown that the detection
accuracy of the proposed algorithm can reach up to 99.05% and
the average classiﬁcation accuracy is 93.66%, which verify the
effectiveness of our algorithm for low-speed congested trafﬁc.
Index Terms — Anisotropic magnetoresistive sensor (AMR),
low-speed congested trafﬁc, vehicle detection, vehicle
classiﬁcation.
I. I NTRODUCTION
V
EHICLE detection and classiﬁcation technologies play
an important role in the Intelligent Transportation
Systems (ITS). Most conventional trafﬁc surveillance systems
use inductive loop detectors and video cameras [1], [2]. For
maximizing the beneﬁts from these detection technologies,
there must be a large scale deployment of trafﬁc surveillance
on all the major streets and freeways. As intrusive sensors,
however, the installation and maintenance of the inductive loop
detectors lead to a relative high cost. The video camera is also
expensive for a large-scale deployment, and they are greatly
affected by the environmental factors, such as shadow, snow
and rain [3].
Magnetoresistive sensor has recently been utilized for vehi-
cle surveillance owing to its advantages of easy installation,
Manuscript received August 16, 2014; revised September 9, 2014; accepted
September 12, 2014. Date of publicatio n September 18, 2014; date of current
version November 26, 2014. This work was supported by the Aviation Science
Foundation of China under Grant 2011ZD51051. The associate editor coor-
dinating the review of this paper and approving it for publication was
Dr. Stoyan Nihtianov.
The authors are with the School of Automation Science and
Electrical Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China (e-mail:
boyang@buaa.edu.cn; leiyiqun@foxmail.com).
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this paper are available
online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/JSEN.2014.2359014
low cost, small size, strong anti-jamming capability [4], [5],
etc. Scholars worldwide have investigated the application of
magnetic sensor and wireless sensor network for vehicle detec-
tion and classiﬁcation. They offer a very attractive alternative
to inductive loops and video cameras. Currently, the most com-
monly used vehicle detection algorithms based on magnetic
sensor are ﬁxed threshold algorithm, the state machine algo-
rithm and adaptive threshold algorithm [6]. Sing Y . C. et al. [7]
proposed an efﬁcient vehicle detection algorithm, Adaptive
Threshold Detection Algorithm (ATDA), based on 3-axis
Anisotropic Magnetoresistive (AMR) sensor with high preci-
sion of 99%. However the classiﬁcation scheme was not good
enough and overall detection rate was below 60%. Wireless
sensor network based on AMR can detect and track moving
vehicles to obtain more trafﬁc information [8], [9]. Many
classiﬁcation algorithms using AMR sensors were proposed,
including the Hill-Patterns algorithm, the Average-Bar
algorithm, the BP Neural Network algorithm and the Support
Vector Machine, etc. Most of them have conducted experimen-
tal tests and comprehensive study in normal driving situation
and achieved good results. For example, a vehicle detection
and classiﬁcation system was proposed based on a wireless
sensor network using the adaptive threshold algorithm and
intelligent neuron classiﬁer giving the promising classiﬁcation
rate at 90% [10].
However, little attention has been given to the vehicle
detection and classiﬁcation for low-speed congested trafﬁc,
which is prevalent in big cities. When vehicles driving at a
low speed on a congested road, there will be serious waveform
distortion in sensor signal out put, and because vehicles are
close to each other, the front and rear of the vehicle signals will
interfere mutually. All these factors will have a negative impact
on the vehicle detection and classiﬁcation. Trafﬁc surveillance
for low speed congested vehicles will be a new direction for
future research.
This paper focuses on the investigation of anisotropic
magnetic sensor to detect the vehicle in a slow-moving
and congested trafﬁc zone. A simple and effective vehicle
detection and classiﬁcation system is developed based on low-
cost three-axis AMR sensors. T he characteristics of the vehi-
cle magnetic detection signals are particularly analyzed and
processed. A novel ﬁxed threshold state machine algorithm is
proposed based on variance weighting to detect vehicles within
a single lane. The signal featur es are extracted accurately and
the vehicles are classiﬁed by using a classiﬁcation tree model.
1530-437X © 2014 I EEE. Personal u se is perm itted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:18:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 2 =====

Y ANG AND LEI: VEHICLE DETECTION AND CLASSIFICATION FOR LOW-SPEED CONGESTED TRAFFIC 1133
Fig. 1. The disturbance of of Earth’s magnetic ﬂux lines by a moving vehicle.
Fig. 2. Sensor node.
The experimental result has shown that the proposed algo-
rithms can effectively detect th e vehicles in the slow-moving
and congested trafﬁc zone and the accuracy of classiﬁcation
is improved correspondingly.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces the
foundation of vehicle detection using AMR sensor. Section III
describes the principle of our novel signal variance based ﬁxed
threshold state machine algorithm. The algorithm for vehicle
classiﬁcation is given in Sec tion IV . Section V presents the
experimental results of vehicle detection and vehicle classi-
ﬁcation for low-speed congested trafﬁc. Finally, Section VI
contains some conclusions.
II. F OUNDATION OF VEHICLE DETECTION
USING AMR S ENSOR
The geomagnetic ﬁeld provides a uniform magnetic ﬁeld
over a wide area and the magnetic sensor can detect the
disturbances of the Earth’s ﬁeld caused by a large ferrous
object like a vehicle. The disturbance depends on the ferrous
material, its size and orientation (Figure 1).
The magnetic sensor is made of a nickel-iron (Permalloy)
thin ﬁlm deposited on a silicon wafer and patterned as a
resistive strip. Typically, four resistors are connected in a
Wheatstone bridge conﬁguration to generate a differential
output voltage [11].
Fig. 2 shows the sensor node we designed, which is
composed of a CC2430 processor and an AMR sensor, etc.
The AMR sensor we used is Honeywell triaxial HMC5883L,
a fully digital sensor with built-in multiplexed ADC. The
sensor has 12 bits ADC coupled with low noise AMR sensors
and achieves 5 milli-gauss resolution in ±8 Gauss Fields.
There are also 4 infrared sensors and a sound sensor in the
sensor node to complete other measurement tasks. Only the
AMR sensor is used in our experiment for the vehicle detection
and classiﬁcation with low power consumption. The average
Fig. 3. Magnetic signals of a two-box vehicle: (a) original signal and
(b) signal after ﬁltering.
current drain of the sensor node is only about 100 µA at
work. The AMR sensor senses d isturbance of the Earth’s
magnetic ﬁeld caused by a moving vehicle. This sensor can
achieve magnetic ﬁeld measur ement for X, Y , and Z axis
simultaneously with high accuracy and efﬁciency. Choosing
a triaxial AMR sensor can obtain c omprehensive information
of magnetic ﬁeld with high accuracy.
III. V
EHICLE DETECTION
When a vehicle passes over an AMR sensor, the sensor
will detect the dipole moments of various parts of the vehicle,
and the related ﬁeld variation will reveal a very detailed
magnetic signature of the vehicle. Figures 3(a) shows a 3-axis
magnetometer output for a two-box vehicle passing directly
over it. The three curves represent the X, Y , and Z-axis of the
variation in the geomagnetic ﬁeld respectively for the moving
vehicle.
In order to facilitate the analysis for signals of the vehicle, a
series of equally spaced sampling points are used to represent
the three axis magnetic signals of vehicle. The sample rate of
sensor is 75 Sa/s, so the horizontal axis is in Counts, and the
vertical axis is in milli-gauss, which we mark as Mgauss in
the following ﬁgures.
⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩
X ={ X (1), X (2), X (3) ,..., X (n)}
Y ={ Y (1), Y (2), Y (3) ,..., Y (n)}
Z ={ Z (1), Z (2), Z (3) ,..., Z (n)}
(1)
To get a smoother sensor signal, we use a digital ﬁltering
algorithm to eliminate noise. The ﬁlter combines fast Fourier
transform and median ﬁlter, which can not only ﬁlter out
background random noise well but also be able to suppress
the big impulse noise. The ﬁltering result are listed as follows
and shown in Figure 3(b).
⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩
fil te re d_X (k) = fftfi l t (hn, medf ilt 1(X
(k), N))
fil te re d_Y (k) = fftfi l t (hn, medf ilt 1(Y (k), N))
fil te re d_Z (k) = fftfi l t (hn, medf ilt 1(Z (k), N))
(2)
where hn is the ideal low-pass ﬁlter window function and N is
median ﬁltering parameter.
The function medﬁlt1 implements one-dimensional median
ﬁltering and the function fftﬁlt is a frequency domain ﬁl-
tering technique works on FIR ﬁlter using the efﬁcient
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:18:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 3 =====

1134 IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 15, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015
Fig. 4. Sensor installation diagram.
Fig. 5. Original magnetic signals of vehicles.
FFT-based method of overlap-add. {ﬁltered_X(k), ﬁltered_Y(k),
ﬁltered_Z(k)} are 3-axis vehicle magnetic signals after the
ﬁltering processing.
The vehicle density in most developed cities is centralized
and huge, which cause a small amount of amplitude attenua-
tion of output magnetic signal as the vehicles are driving at
slow speed. Signals of adjacent vehicles will interfere with
each other as two vehicles are crawling bumper to bumper.
Furthermore, the output magnetic signal of sensor will drift
when environment temperature changes [12]. All these factors
will have a serious impact on the detection and segmentation
of the vehicle signals.
An experiment is performed to analyze the signal charac-
teristics of the vehicles. An AMR sensor node is placed on
the side of lane and is about 1.5 m away from the vehicle.
The system layout is illustrated in Fig. 4. X-axis is the
direction parallel to the moving vehicle. Y-axis is the direction
perpendicular to the direction of moving vehicle. Z-axis is the
direction perpendicular to the ground.
Fig. 5 shows the sensor signal of 13 vehicles driving at about
10km/h. There is a slight drift in background signal over time.
We deﬁne F(k) as the magnetic ﬁeld intensity of measured
signal.
F(k) =
√
X (k)2 + Y (k)2 + Z (k)2 (3)
A new variance-based multi-state machine adaptive thresh-
old detection algorithm was proposed in Ref. [10]. The algo-
rithm calculated the real-time data ﬂuctuation using historical
data variance and then predict ed average signal threshold
in future. This algorithm is an efﬁcient vehicle detection
algorithm with high precision of 97% when the vehicle is
driving normally. But for the vehicles crawling bumper to
Fig. 6. Adaptive threshold detection algorithm [10].
bumper with low speed in congested urban trafﬁc, the detection
result is not satisfactory.
Fig. 6 shows that the geomagnetic disturbances will be
weakened when the vehicle is traveling at a low speed, i.e.
the 5th, 11th, 12th vehicles in the ﬁgure. On the one hand, the
interval between two vehicles is so short that the variance of
the history signal does not reduce and the adaptive threshold
increases, on the other hand, the amplitude of signal is small
due to low-speed. Therefore, the algorithm cannot detect all
these vehicles correctly. In addition, the adaptive threshold
algorithm is not conducive to accurately determine the time
information of vehicles entering and leaving the monitored
area, which will increase the difﬁculty of effectively separating
the vehicle signal.
In order to detect the low-speed congested vehicles, this
paper presents an effective ﬁxed threshold state machine
algorithm based on the signal variance weighting. Firstly, we
calculate the variance of magnetic ﬁeld intensity signal, and
then multiply it by the original signal value as a weighting
factor. This operation can retain the characteristics of the mag-
netic ﬁeld intensity signal; meanwhile it can also suppress the
signal drift by the property of signal variance. The algorithm
is given by
Processed _F(k) = fi l t e re d_F(k) × variance_F(k) (4)
where fil te re d_F(k) is the ﬁltered magnetic ﬁeld intensity
signal and variance _F(k) is the variance of the magnetic ﬁeld
intensity signal.
fi l t e re d_F(k) = fftfil t (hn, medf ilt 1(F(k), N)) (5)
In this paper, the variance of the signal value is calculated
by the forward and backward 15 points. In the absence of
a passing vehicle, the variance of signal will still be very
low. The vehicle signals become more signiﬁcant and easier to
identify because of the obvious increase of the signal variance
when the vehicle is passing.
When the vehicle is driving a t a low speed and the vehicle-
to-vehicle distance is relative small, the reference value will
generate a large deviation due to the signal interference
between certain vehicles. To improve the stability of the
proposed algorithm, a state machine is introduced to judge
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:18:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 4 =====

Y ANG AND LEI: VEHICLE DETECTION AND CLASSIFICATION FOR LOW-SPEED CONGESTED TRAFFIC 1135
Fig. 7. Scheme of state machine algorithm.
Fig. 8. The effect of vehicle identiﬁcation.
the vehicles using two thresholds { H-value, L-value }which
divided the input signal to three cases.
The vehicle detection algorithm uses the deviation of
processed_F(k) from a baseline to drive a state machine, which
makes the vehicle counting decisions (Fig. 7). The input of the
decision state machine is deﬁned as
Ip =
⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩
0, i f processed _F(k) ⩽ L-value
2, i f processed _F(k) ⩾ H-value
1, other wise
(6)
where {H-value, L-value} are the high threshold and the low
threshold.
At the initial state, reset all parameter to the initial value
and the state machine to an Un-triggered state. Duration_count
denotes the duration of vehicle signal and vehicle_count is
the number of vehicles. If Ip changes to 2 ( processed_F(k) ≥
H-value), the state machine will turn to a Half-triggered state
and we consider the vehicle may enter the sensor monitoring
area.
Normally, processed_F(k) increases ﬁrst and then decreases.
If it has exceeded the L-value for a long time, the algorithm
will return to INIT. Otherwise, Ip will turn to 0, and the state
machine will turn to a Triggered state. Then, we consider
the vehicle is leaving the sensor monitoring area. Let the
vehicle_count plus 1 and retu rn to INIT waiting for another
vehicle arriving.
The vehicle detection result is shown in Fig. 8. The variance
of the signal can effectively prevent the reference value
from drifting caused by the mutual interference between two
Fig. 9. Vehicle signal seg mentation. (a) Original vehicle signal. (b) Vehicle
identiﬁcation. (c) Vehicle signal segmentation.
adjacent vehicles. The processe d signal can be distinguished
more clearly even though the vehicles are driving bumper to
bumper. It can be concluded that our algorithm has higher
detection rate both for low speed and congested vehicles.
IV . VEHICLE CLASSIFICATION
We perform a simple classiﬁcation based on a hierarchical
tree methodology as in Ref. [13], which uses the above vehicle
information to classify the vehicles into ﬁve types: Motorcycle,
Two-box, Saloon, Bus and S port Utility Vehicle (SUV).
A. Signal Segmentation
The ﬁrst step of vehicle classiﬁcation is to extract the
vehicle signal from sensor signal. The selection of entering
and leaving points of vehicles will have a great inﬂuence on
vehicle classiﬁcation. We assume the vehicle entering if the
signal is just above H-value, and the vehicle leaving if lower
than L-value in the above-mentioned detection algorithm. Then
we segment the vehicle signals effectively according to the
time information of vehicles entering and leaving the sensor
monitoring area. There is slight loss about signal interception
portions due to the high threshold, so that we compensate the
time when the vehicle enters the sensor detection zone. In this
paper, we extend 10 forward measuring points of the signal
expansion to solve this problem (Figure 9).
Fig. 10 shows a schematic view of signal segmentation
for above 13 vehicles in Section III. This result illustrates
that vehicle X-axis signal and Y-axis signal have signiﬁcant
characteristics compared with Z-axis signal. The Z-axis signal
is a single peak wave because the geomagnetic disturbances
are consistent in this direction when vehicle passes over the
AMR sensor.
B. Feature Extraction
In order to identify the vehicle type, some quantitative
indices are required to extr act the features of the magnetic
signal. These indices should have high correlations with the
signal waveform and can be easily computed. As above
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:18:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 5 =====

1136 IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 15, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015
Fig. 10. The effect of vehicle signal segmentation.
Fig. 11. Magnetic signals generated b y different types of vehicles.
mentioned, the Z-axis signal characteristic of the vehicle has
less inﬂuence in classiﬁcation process. Thus, only X-axis and
Y-axis vehicle signals are analyzed in the following process
of feature extraction.
There are ﬁve types of vehicles to be analyzed. Each
type of vehicle signal has its own unique characteristics due
to the different structure of vehicle. In this paper, we will
extract features through the time-domain waveform structure
after data analysis. It should be noted that, the same type
of vehicle signal waveform may be slightly different due to
the impact of vehicle speed, vehicle equipment and other
factors. But this does not have much impact for identifying
the characteristics of vehicle signal. These ﬁve types vehicles
signal characteristics are shown in Fig. 11.
We deﬁne that L is the vehicle signal duration; E and
EV are the signal energy and the average energy of the
signal.
E =
∑
(X
2(k) + Y 2(k) + Z2(k)) (7)
EV = E
L (8)
VX is the ratio of positive and negative energy of X-axis
signal; VY is the ratio of positive and negative energy of Y-axis
signal.
VX =
∑
X (k)>0
X2(k)
∑
X (k)<0
X2(k) VY =
∑
Y (k)>0
Y 2(k)
∑
Y (k)<0
Y 2(k) (9)
TABLE I
DIFFERENT TYPES OF VEHICLES SIGNAL CHARACTERISTICS
A total of 100 vehicle signals (20 vehicles for each type)
were collected for analysis of their characteristics under the
same test condition. The speed of vehicles in our experiment
is about 10km/h ∼ 30km/h. The analysis result is shown
in Table I.
The number of vehicle sampling points is deﬁned as the
vehicle signal duration. The bus signals are sampled at about
200 to 400 points with a sampling frequency of 75 Hz, while
sampling points of other types are generally between 50 and
100 and can even exceed 150 in particularly low speeds.
The average speeds of vehicle we concerned in experiments
are in a limited range (10 ∼ 15km/h for the low-speed
congested trafﬁc and 30 ∼ 40km/h for the normal trafﬁc).
Within this speed range, even if a bus drives faster and other
vehicles drive slower, the signal duration of the bus is still
signiﬁcantly longer than others. Therefore, we can distinguish
the bus from the other smaller cars by using the signal
duration L.
The volume of vehicles is reﬂected in vehicle signal
energy so that we can distinguish the motorcycles and
SUV commercial vehicle according to the signal energy
E and EV. In order to increase the stability of the pro-
posed algorithm, the average energy of vehicle signal EV
is extracted as an auxiliary characteristic value for vehicle
classiﬁcation.
Two-box car and saloon car are relatively similar in terms
of signal length and energy, but the structure of the vehicle
signal has more obvious characteristics. The value of
X-axis signal of two-box car is essentially negative while
value of X-axis signal of saloon car is positive. The ratio
of positive and negative energy of X-axis signal is extracted
as a characteristic for identiﬁcation. In order to increase
the stability of the proposed algorithm, the ratio of positive
and negative energy of Y-axis signal is also extracted as
an auxiliary characteristic to distinguish two-box car from
saloon car.
C. Vehicle Classiﬁcation Algorithm
The above features are used here to construct the hierar-
chical classiﬁcation tree for cl assifying vehicles. The speciﬁc
classiﬁcation process is based on hierarchical tree shown in
Fig. 12.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:18:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 6 =====

Y ANG AND LEI: VEHICLE DETECTION AND CLASSIFICATION FOR LOW-SPEED CONGESTED TRAFFIC 1137
Vehicle Classiﬁcation Algorithm
① if(L≥L0); {bus}count, else
② if(E≤Ea&&EV≤EVa); {moto}count, else
③ if(E≥Eb&&EV≥EVb); {suv}count, else
④ if(VX≤VX0&&VY≤VY0); {two-box}count
else
⑤ {saloon}count, return ① cycle until the end of all
vehicles judgment
Fig. 12. Schematic of classiﬁcation algorithm.
The classiﬁcation tree model has three layers: the ﬁrst layer
of the classiﬁcation criteria is the vehicle signal duration L;
the second layer is the vehicle signal energy, including energy
E and average energy EV; the third layer is the ratio of positive
and negative energy of X-axis signal VX and Y-axis signal VY .
The vehicle will be considered as a saloon car only when its
characteristics do not meet any of the given conditions.
{L
0, Ea,E V a , Eb,E V b,V X 0,V Y 0}i sas e to fﬁ x e d
threshold algorithm parameters. The thresholds are chosen as
follows: L 0 = 200, Ea = 500, EVa = 10, Eb = 10000,
EVb = 300, VX0 = 1, VY0 = 0.7. Various types of vehicles
can be distinguished effectively using the vehicle classiﬁcation
algorithm. The advantage of this algorithm has small amount
of calculation and high classiﬁcation accuracy.
V. E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
In this paper, the congested trafﬁc condition is our main
concern. The experimental test is performed for normal trafﬁc
and low speed congested trafﬁc respectively at temperature
about 21 ∼ 25 °C. The vehicle speed we tested is about
30 ∼ 40km/h for normal trafﬁc, and 10 ∼ 15 km/h for low-
speed congested trafﬁc respectively. The sensor node is placed
7 cm above the ground and about 1.5 m away from the vehicle
(Figure 13).
We focus on the vehicle detection and classiﬁcation on a
single lane in experiments. The AMR magnetic sensors work
well for normal curbside sensing ranges of one to ﬁve feet
(about 1.5m), while the width of lane is about 3.5m in the
urban road of Beijing and the width of the vehicle is more
than 2m in normal conditions, so the effect caused by the
other lanes could be neglected.
Vehicle detection results are listed in Table II. For normal
trafﬁc, there are 147 vehicles being detected and all vehicles
Fig. 13. Experimental scene.
TABLE II
RESULTS OF VEHICLE DETECTION
TABLE III
RESULTS OF VEHICLE CLASSIFICATION
are identiﬁed correctly. For low-speed congested trafﬁc, there
are 105 vehicles being observed. But one of the vehicles is not
detected as it approaching another one too close. Two vehicles
are misjudged as four due to the low speed. Therefore, the total
number of vehicle detection result is 106 and the detection
accuracy is still over 99% for low speed congested trafﬁc.
Vehicle classiﬁcation results are listed in Table III.
The vehicles are tested on the main and side roads because
the motorcycles and the buses cannot drive in the same lane.
Most vehicles on the congested roads are small cars and SUV
vehicles. During the rush hours, bus lanes are travel lanes
restricted to buses. Therefore, the classiﬁcation process in low-
speed driving is given only for these three types of vehicles.
The classiﬁcation accuracy is over 90% for low-speed con-
gested trafﬁc. Although it is slightly lower than the accuracy
for normal trafﬁc due to the amplitude attenuation of vehicle
signal and the interference between adjacent vehicles, it is still
good and promising.
VI. C
ONCLUSION
This paper presents the vehicle detection and classiﬁca-
tion methods for low-speed congested trafﬁc with anisotropic
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:18:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 7 =====

1138 IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 15, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015
magnetoresistive sensor. A novel ﬁxed threshold state machine
algorithm based on signal variance is proposed to detect low-
speed congested vehicles within a single lane. Five signal
features are extracted to cla ssify the detected vehicles into
ﬁve types using the model classiﬁcation algorithm based
on hierarchical tree methodology. The experimental results
obtained from the low-speed congested trafﬁc have shown that
the proposed algorithm has a high detection and classiﬁcation
accuracy.
The average speeds of vehicle we concern in the experi-
ments are in a limited range (10 ∼ 15km/h for the low-speed
congested trafﬁc and 30 ∼ 40km/h for the normal trafﬁc).
Once the vehicle speed change exceeds the range, it should be
introduced as a correction factor for the signal characteristics,
which will be investigated in our future research.
R
EFERENCES
[1] R. Wang, L. Zhang, K. Xiao, R. Sun, and L. Cui, “EasiSee: Real-time
vehicle classiﬁcation and counting via low-cost collaborative sensing,”
IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 414–424, Feb. 2014.
[2] Y . Iwasaki, S. Kawata, and T. Nakamiya, “Robust vehicle detection
even in poor visibility conditions using infrared thermal images and its
application to road trafﬁc ﬂow monitoring,” Meas. Sci. Technol., vol. 22,
no. 8, p. 085501, Aug. 2011.
[3] E. Sifuentes, O. Casas, and R. Pallas-Areny, “Wireless magnetic sensor
node for vehicle detection with optical wake-up,” IEEE Sensors J. ,
vol. 11, no. 8, pp. 1669–1676, Aug. 2011.
[4] S. Taghvaeeyan and R. Rajamani, “The development of vehicle position
estimation algorithms based on the use of AMR sensors,” IEEE Trans.
Intell. Transp. Syst. , vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 1845–1854, Dec. 2012.
[ 5 ]M .H .K a n g ,B .W .C h o i ,K .C .K o h ,J .H .L e e ,a n dG .T .P a r k ,
“Experimental study of a vehicle detector with an AMR sensor,” Sens.
Actuators A, Phys. , vol. 118, no 2, pp. 278–284, Feb. 2005.
[6] P. Ni, L. Le, and W. Yu, “Review of vehicle detection algorithms
based on magnetoresistive sensors,” Comput. Eng. Appl., vol. 45, no. 19,
pp. 245–248, 2009.
[7] S. Y . Cheung, S. Coleri, B. Dunda r, S. Ganesh, C.-W. Tan, and
P. Varaiya, “Trafﬁc measurement and vehicle classiﬁcation with sin-
gle magnetic sensor,” J. Transp. Res. Board , vol. 1917, no. 1,
pp. 173–181, Dec. 2005.
[8] B.-G. Lee and J.-H. Kim, “Algorithm for ﬁnding the moving direction of
a vehicle using magnetic sensor,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. CICA, Apr. 2011,
pp. 74–79.
[9] S. Marshall, “Vehicle detection using a magnetic ﬁeld sensor,” IEEE
Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 65–68, May 1978.
[10] B. Yang and W. Nin, “Vehicle detection and classiﬁcation algorithm
based on anisotropic magnetoresistive sensor,” C h i n .J .S c i .I n s t r u m .,
vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 537–544, Mar. 2013.
[11] X. S. Li, R. Q. Kang, Y . X. Liu, Z. H. Wang, and X. Y . Shu, “High
accuracy AMR magnetometer and its application to vehicle detection,”
Adv. Mater. Res., vols. 443–444, pp. 150–155, Jan. 2012.
[12] P. Ripka, M. Butta, and A. Platil, “Temperature stability of AMR
sensors,” Sensor Lett., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 74–77, Jan. 2013.
[13] S. Kaewkamnerd, R. Pongthornseri, J. Chinrungrueng, and T. Silawan,
“Automatic vehicle classiﬁcation using wireless magnetic sensor,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop IDAACS , Sep. 2009, pp. 420–424.
Bo Yang was born in Sichuan, China, in 1972. She
received the B.S. and M.S. degrees from Beihang
University, Beijing, China, in 1993 and 1996, respec-
tively, and the Ph.D. degree from the University
of Paderborn, Paderborn, Germany, in 2004, all in
electrical engineering.
She has been with the School of Automation Sci-
ence and Electrical Engineering, Beihang University,
since 2004, where she is currently an Associate Pro-
fessor. Her main research interests include intelligent
measurement and control.
Yiqun Lei was born in Shaanxi, China, in 1991.
She received the B.S. degree in automation science
and electric engineering from Beihang University,
Beijing, China, in 2013, where she is currently pur-
suing the M.S. degree at the School of Automation
Science and Electrical Engineering. Her research
interest includes wireless sensor networks.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:18:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 