

===== PAGE 1 =====

9976 IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 19, NO. 21, NOVEMBER 1, 2019
V ehicle Classiﬁcation Based on Feature Selection
With Anisotropic Magnetoresistive Sensor
Xueting Zhang and Haonan Huang
Abstract— Vehicle classiﬁcation based on magnetic sensors can
be effectively applied to intelligent transportation and realize
intelligent management of trafﬁc. The use of representative vehi-
cle signal features is a prerequisite and guarantee for accurate
vehicle classiﬁcation. This paper uses a single 3-axis magnetic
sensor to acquire vehicle signals and extract a large number
of features from the vehicle signals. In order to obtain a set
of features that are simple and without loss of classiﬁcation
accuracy, we propose a Filtering algorithm based on Feature
Pairing Elimination (FPE-Filter). In addition, choosing the right
classiﬁer is also crucial for models with high classiﬁcation
accuracy. In this paper, we compare four common classiﬁcation
models: SVM, RF, KNN, and C4.5. The experimental results
show that the SVM performs best and the classiﬁcation accuracy
reaches 95%.
Index Terms — Anisotropic magnetoresistive sensor (AMR),
vehicle classiﬁcation, feature selection, ReliefF.
I. I NTRODUCTION
W
ITH the rising of the people’s travel demand, intelligent
transportation technology plays an increasingly impor-
tant role in the optimal management of trafﬁc. The detection of
vehicles and the classiﬁcation o f vehicles are an indispensable
part of intelligent transportatio n technology. For vehicle detec-
tion, inductive loop detectors and cameras are commonly used
for detection. However, it is well known that the installation of
the inductive loop detector has a high cost, and the ﬂaw of the
camera being vulnerable to the climatic environment is still
its biggest shortcoming. Compared with induction coils and
cameras, the magnetic sensor’s small size, easy installation,
low cost and strong climate adaptability make it more and
more widely used. Many methods have studied the detection of
vehicles based on magnetic sensors, such as [1]–[3]. The focus
of this paper is on the vehicle classiﬁcation. Therefore, after
comparing various vehicle detection algorithms, the double
window detection algorithm proposed in [3] is used for vehicle
detection and signal acquisition because of its strong stability
and higher accuracy.
In many studies, the number of sensors used by vehicle
detection nodes is one or two, both of which have advantages
Manuscript received May 20, 2019; revised July 4, 2019; accepted July 10,
2019. Date of publication July 15, 2019; da te of current version October 4,
2019. This work was supported by the Zhejiang Provincial Key Lab of Equip-
ment Electronics under Grant 2019E10009. Th e associate editor coordinating
the review of this paper and approvin g it for publication was Prof. Meribout
Mahmoud. (Corresponding author: Haonan Huang.)
The authors are with the College of El ectronic and Information, Hangzhou
Dianzi University, Hangzhou 310000, China (e-mail: x.t.zhang@hotmail.com;
hellodaren@outlook.com).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/JSEN.2019.2928828
and disadvantages. The use of two magnetic sensors provides
an important feature of vehicle length, while the use of a single
magnetic sensor reduces costs. In addition, the vehicle signal
features extracted by different literature are also different. For
example, the work detailed in [4] uses two 3-axis AMR sensors
to collect the magnetic ﬁeld disturbance signal of the vehicle.
The vehicle length, average energy and the peak number of the
hill pattern are taken as featur es of the vehicle. The process
in [5] uses a single 3-axis AMR sensor to extract the duration
of the signal, the signal energy, the average energy of the
signal, the positive-negative energy ratio of the X-axis signal,
and the positive-negative energy ratio of the Y -axis signal as
features of the vehicle. Other similar methods such as [6]–[8]
extract the average perpendicular magnetic height, differential
energy, variance, maximum value, number of extreme values,
and other features of the signal.
On the other hand, most methods directly apply the obtained
feature set to the classiﬁcation a lgorithm after feature extrac-
tion. However, not all of these features are equally important
for a speciﬁc task. Some of them may be redundant or
even irrelevant [9]. These redundant features can not only
impair the accuracy of the classi ﬁcation algorithm, but also
affect the execution efﬁcien cy of the algorithm. One way
to solve this problem is featur e selection. Feature selection
is the process of selecting a smaller features subset that is
sufﬁcient to accurately predict the class labels of the training
set [10].
This paper focuses on the effectiveness of feature selection
for vehicle classiﬁcation based on 3-axis magnetic sensors.
First, the vehicle is detected using double window detection
algorithm and the original vehicle signal is acquired. Second,
different features for characteriz ing the original vehicle signal
are extracted to obtain a featur e set for vehicle classiﬁca-
tion algorithm training and testing. Moreover, the established
feature selection algorithm sel ects the optimal feature subset
without redundant features in the feature set. Finally, the
classiﬁcation algorithm is used to train the obtained feature
subsets to obtain the optimal classiﬁcation model.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
Section II introduces the foundation of vehicle classiﬁcation
using magnetic sensor. Section III introduces the feature
extraction of vehicle signals. Section IV describes the princi-
ples of the novel feature selection algorithm. Section V intro-
duces how to build the classiﬁcation models. The experimental
results of vehicle classiﬁcation are given in Section VI. Section
VII gives the conclusions of this paper.
1558-1748 © 2019 I EEE. Personal u se is perm itted, but republication/redistri bution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:20:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 2 =====

ZHANG AND HUANG: VEHICLE CLASSIFICA TION BASED ON FEA TURE SELECTION WITH AMR 9977
Fig. 1. Sensor node.
Fig. 2. Sensor node conﬁguration diagram.
II. F OUNDA TION OF VEHICLE CLASSIFICA TION
USING AMR S ENSOR
The earth provides a uniform magnetic ﬁeld over a wide
area. A car can cause magnetic ﬁeld disturbances in speciﬁc
areas due to its own metal material. Under the same mea-
surement conditions, the magnetic ﬁeld disturbance caused by
different types of vehicles will be different. Therefore, the
magnetic ﬁeld disturbance information of different vehicles
collected using the magnetic sensor can be used for vehicle
classiﬁcation.
Fig.1 shows a sensor node for vehicle detection and
signal collection. The node contains an STM32F107ZET6
microprocessor, a 3-axis magnetic sensor module and a wire-
less transmission module. Among them, the 3-axis mag-
netic sensor we used is Honeywell triaxial HMC5883L.
This sensor can achieve 5 milligauss resolution in ±8g a u s s
ﬁeld. In this paper, the sample rate of the magnetic sensor is
75 Sa/s.
Fig.2 shows the layout of the sensor nodes. The X-axis
is perpendicular to the direction of the lane. The Y -axis
is contrary to the direction of the lane and the Z-axis is
perpendicular to the road surface and upward.
TABLE I
FEA TURES EXTRACTED FROM VEHICLE SIGNALS
III. F EA TURE EXTRACTION
Generally, a huge number of data points are included in the
vehicle signal. Redundant data slow down the classiﬁcation
process and often cause inaccurate results. To reduce the data
dimensionality and for a better performance, feature extraction
techniques are often used in this stage [11]. In this paper,
the features of the signals acquired in the three directions of
the 3-axis magnetic sensor will be extracted. The obtained
features will be combined into a feature set to describe the
vehicle type information for a car. It should be noted that the
signal described in this paper is the signal after the background
magnetic ﬁeld is removed. The features used in this paper are
shown in T ABLE I. Among these features, maximum, range,
relative position of maximum, relative position of minimum,
number of local maxima, and the number of local minima
can describe the difference in local structure between different
signals, while the mean, ratio of positive and negative energy,
variance, approximate entropy, crossing mean counts, and the
average energy can reﬂect the inherent differences in the over-
all structure between different signals. After extracting each set
of features for each vehicle, we include each set of features in
a feature set. This feature set will be used as the operational
object of the subsequent feature selection algorithm.
In T ABLE I, X
max , Ymax ,a n d Zmax represent the maximum
values of the signals collected in the X-axis, Y -axis, and Z-axis
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:20:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 3 =====

9978 IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 19, NO. 21, NOVEMBER 1, 2019
Fig. 3. Interpretation of features.
directions of the magnetic sensor, respectively. The same
principle is also applied to other feature symbol. Speciﬁcally,
the relative position of maximum and the relative position of
minimum are deﬁned as⎧
⎨⎨
⎨
⎨⎨⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨⎨⎩
X_P
max = X_Lmax
X L
Y _Pmax = Y _Lmax
YL
Z _Pmax = Z _Lmax
Z L
(1)
where, Lmax and Lmin indicate the distances of the maximum
point and the minimum point to the detection starting point,
L represent the length of the signal (Fig.3).
The ratio of positive and negative energy and the average
energy are deﬁned as
⎧
⎨⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨⎨⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨⎨⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨⎨⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨⎨⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨
⎨⎩
X
Pn =

X (k)>0
X (k)

X (k)<0
X (k)
YPn =

Y (k)>0
Y (k)

Y (k)<0
Y (k)
Z Pn =

Z (k)>0
Z (k)

Z (k)<0
Z (k)
Ev =
L
k=1
(X (k)2 + Y (k)2 + Z (k)2)
L
(2)
where, X (k), Y (k),a n d Z (k) indicates the k-th value of the
signal in the three directions of the magnetic sensor.
Crossing mean counts feature is deﬁned as the times of
vehicle signal crossing the mean line [7], which is two in
the Fig.3. Approximate entropy is an indicator to describe the
complexity of a signal. The sp eciﬁc calculation is described
in [12].
In conclusion, we extracted a total of 34 features from the
sensor’s triaxial signal:
F =[ Xmax , X R , X_ Pmax , Xmean , X Pn , X_Nmax ,
X_Nmin , Xvar , X ApEn , Xcross ,
Ymax , YR , Y _Pmax , Ymean , YPn , Y _Nmax ,
Y _Nmin , Yvar , YApEn , Ycross ,
Zmax , Z R , Z _Pmax , Zmean , Z Pn , Z _Nmax ,
Z _Nmin , Zvar , Z ApEn , Zcross ,
Ev] (3)
IV . F EA TURE SELECTION
After the process of feature extraction, the signal samples
for each vehicle will be descri bed by 34 features. Designing
a classiﬁer with a large number of features under a limited
number of samples can make the computational overhead
too large and affect classiﬁca tion performance. Therefore,
it is particularly important to select a feature subset that is
smaller and more stable than th e entire feature set by feature
selection. Feature selection can be divided into three general
categories: 1) ﬁlters 2) wrappers 3) embedded techniques.
Filter methods represent the simplest and fastest approaches.
They sorts and selects features based on statistical measures
(e.g., correlation, entropy). The main disadvantage of the
ﬁlter approach is that it totally ignores the effects of the
selected feature subset on the performance of the induction
algorithm [13]. On the other hand, wrapper uses a search
algorithm to search through the space of possible features
and evaluate each subset by running the follow-up learning
model on the feature subset. Wrapper can be computationally
expensive and have a risk of overﬁtting to the model [14].
Finally, the main idea of embedded selection is to integrate
the feature selection process w ith the learning process of the
selected classiﬁer. The CART is a representative example of
this method. Embedded techniques are more computationally
efﬁcient than wrappers as they only need one model to produce
results, but because of that, they are limited to the biases
and weaknesses of a speciﬁc classiﬁer [15]. Considering the
advantages and disadvantages of the three feature selection
methods, we propose a ﬁltering selection method based on
Feature Pairing Elimination – FPE-Filter. This method not only
has the advantages of the ﬁltering method, but also removes
the redundant features in the feature set, avoiding the high
computational cost of the wrapper algorithm.
FPE-Filter is divided into two steps: First, the ﬁltering
algorithm is used to perform preliminary ﬁltering on the
feature set, and secondly, the redundant features in the ﬁltered
feature set are deleted.
A. Preliminary Filter
In this paper, ReliefF [16] algorithm is used to ﬁlter the
feature set. Although the ReliefF algorithm is simple, its high
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:20:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 4 =====

ZHANG AND HUANG: VEHICLE CLASSIFICA TION BASED ON FEA TURE SELECTION WITH AMR 9979
efﬁciency and good running results make it widely used. The
feature selection criteria of the ReliefF algorithm is based
on the ability of features to di stinguish between close-range
samples. When dealing with multi-classiﬁcation problems,
ReliefF randomly selects an instance R, and then searches
for k of its nearest neighbors from the same class, called
nearest hits H
j , and also k nearest neighbors from each of
the different classes, called nearest misses M j (C) [17]. The
weight calculation formula of feature A is as follows
W (A)i+1 = W (A)i −
k
j=1
diff(A, R, H j )
m · k
+

C=class (R)
p(C)
1− p(class (R)) ·
k
j=1
diff(A, R, M j (C))
m · k
(4)
where, m represent the number of samples, class (R) is the
class label of the instance R, p(C) is the probability of class C.
diff(A, R1, R2) indicates the difference between the samples
R1 and R2 on the feature A. The calculation formula is as
follows
diff(A, R
1, R2) = |R1(A) − R2(A)|
max (A) − min (A) (5)
Therefore, the preliminary ﬁltering based on the ReliefF
algorithm is given below:
1) The weight of each feature in t he feature set F is obtained
by the ReliefF algorithm.
2) The features in the feature set F are sorted in descending
order by reliefF weights.
3) The weight threshold Wt needs to be set, and if the
feature’s reliefF weight is lower than Wt , the feature will
be deleted from the feature set F. Finally, we can get a
new feature set F.
The ReliefF ﬁltered feature subset F is not optimal and
may contain redundant features. Therefore, further screening
and ﬁltering is required for the obtained feature subset.
B. Remove Redundant Features
Redundant features can be found by calculating the correla-
tion between features. This pap er uses the Pearson correlation
coefﬁcient to measure the correlation between two features.
The calculated value of the Pearso n correlation coefﬁcient falls
within the interval [ − 1, 1]. When the correlation coefﬁcient
is 1, it becomes completely positive correlation; when the
correlation coefﬁcient is − 1, it becomes completely negative
correlation; the larger the absolute value of the correlation
coefﬁcient is, the stronger the correlation is; the closer the
correlation coefﬁcient is to 0, the weaker the correlation. The
formula for calculating the Pear son coefﬁcient between two
features is as follows
r (A
1, A2) = Cov( A1, A2)
√
 Va r(A1) · √
 Va r(A2) (6)
where, Cov( X, Y ) is the covariance between X and Y , Va r(X)
is the variance of X.
Fig. 4. Schematic diagram of s electing redundant features.
The correlation coefﬁcient threshold Rt needs to be set
before the ﬁltering of the redundant features. In this paper,
if the absolute value of the correlation coefﬁcient between
the two features is greater than the threshold Rt ,t h et w o
features are said to be paired. In addition, the concept of
Feature Pairing Number (FPN) is introduced on the basis of
feature pairing. If two different features are paired, the FPN
of both features is increased by one. The initial FPN of each
feature is zero. Obviously, if the FPN of a feature is larger,
the correlation between it and oth er features is greater, and the
redundancy of the feature is stronger. The idea of the feature
selection algorithm proposed in this paper is mainly to count
the FPN of each feature, and to s implify the feature set by
removing the features corresponding to the larger FPN.
Figure 4 is taken as an example to show the selection
process of redundant features. The feature pair (m, n) is used
to represent the m-th feature and the n-th feature pair in the
feature subset F
. Because the features have been sorted in
descending order by weight in the reliefF ﬁltering stage, the
larger the feature number, the smaller the corresponding reliefF
weight. In order to facilitate the calculation of FPN, we store
all paired feature pairs in an array called Pos. The feature with
the largest FPN will be selected and the feature pair containing
the feature will be removed from the Pos, and meanwhile
the feature will be removed from the feature subset F
.T h e
determination of the maximum FPN and the deletion of the
feature corresponding to the maximum FPN are repeatedly
performed until Pos is empty. In a certain selection, if multiple
features obtain the largest FPN value, the feature with the
lowest reliefF weight among the features will be selected as
redundant feature and deleted in the feature set. The pseudo
code of the speciﬁc algorithm is shown in Alogrithm 1.
The algorithm ﬁnally gets an optimal subset F
g that with-
out redundant features. In conclusion, this feature selection
algorithm requires two input parameters, one is the reliefF
weight threshold Wt , and the other is the Pearson correlation
coefﬁcient threshold Rt .
V. B UILDING CLASSIFICA TION MODELS
The classiﬁcation results obtained by different classiﬁers
under the same data set are also different. So in order to ﬁnd
the classiﬁer that is most suitable for vehicle classiﬁcation, we
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:20:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 5 =====

9980 IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 19, NO. 21, NOVEMBER 1, 2019
Algorithm 1 Basic Idea for Removing Redundant Features
Input: Feature subset F ﬁltered by ReliefF
Output: Optimal subset Fg without redundant features
1 Initialize P ={ Pn = 0, n = 1, 2,··· , N}, Pos ← ∅. Pn
is the FPN of the n-th feature, and N is the number of
features in F;
2 The Pearson correlation coefﬁcient rij between two
different features in F is calculated;
3 if abs (rij ) ≥ Rt then
4 Pos ← (i, j );
5 Pi = Pi + 1, Pj = Pj + 1;
6 while Pos = ∅ do
7 Find the maximum value of P;
8 if (The number of maximum values in P) = 1 then
9 The ReliefF weights of all the features that obtain
the FPN maximum value are compared, and the
feature with the smallest ReliefF weight is taken as
the redundant feature;
10 else
11 The feature corresponding to the maximum value
is taken as the redundant feature;
12 Delete the feature pairs in the Pos that contains the
redundant feature;
13 Delete the redundant feature in F;
14 Update the FPN according to the Pos;
15 return F;
Fig. 5. Schematic diagram of cons tructing classiﬁcation models.
compare four commonly used classiﬁer models: C4.5, KNN,
SVM, and Random Forest (RF).
In this paper, the vehicle types are divided into three
categories according to the si ze and structure of the vehi-
cle: TRUCK, Saloon and SUV (SAS), and BUS. We col-
lected a total of 2436 vehicle signals (BUS-738, SAUV -987,
TRUCK-711) and extracted 34 si gnal features for each vehicle
signal. In order to get a reliable classiﬁcation result, the data
set is divided into two parts. As shown in Figure 5, 70% of
the data is used to train the model and the remaining 30% is
used as an independent test set. Then, we apply FPE-Filter
to the train set. Under the condition of Wt ∈[ 0.04, 0.1]
(step: 0.01), Rt ∈[ 0.55, 0.85] (step: 0.1), 28 sets of feature
subsets are obtained (Some of these feature subsets are likely
to be the same). Next, we constructed different classiﬁcation
Fig. 6. Accuracy of feature subsets.
models with different classiﬁers on these feature subsets. In the
process of model building, grid search is used to search for
optimal model parameters, and 5 -fold cross-validation is used
to evaluate the model classiﬁcation accuracy. Finally, the test
set was used to verify the model performance.
VI. E
XPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
This paper uses the classiﬁcation accuracy ACC as the
indicator to evaluate the classiﬁcation model. It is deﬁned as
ACC = Ncorrect /Ntotal (7)
where, Ncorrect is the number of correctly classiﬁed cars, and
Ntotal is the total number of tested vehicles.
A total of 8 different feature subsets were generated in
this experiment, as shown in Table II. Fig. 6 shows the
classiﬁcation accuracy and average classiﬁcation accuracy of
C4.5, KNN, SVM, and RF under different subsets. From
the perspective of the classiﬁcation average, the SVM per-
f o r m sb e s ti nf o u rc l a s s i ﬁ e r s ,f o l l o w e db yR F ,a n dC 4 . 5i s
the worst performer. In addition, the optimal feature subsets
corresponding to different classiﬁers are also different. For
example, SVM achieves the highest classiﬁcation accuracy in
the fourth feature subset, while KNN obtains the optimal value
in the sixth feature subset. Mor eover, We also compared the
results of the classiﬁers between the FPE-Filter based and the
no-feature-selection under the c onditions of feature extraction
and no feature extraction, respectively, as shown in Table III.
The construction method for the data set under the no feature
extraction condition is as follows.
Since the information of each vehicle is characterized by
the magnetic ﬁeld disturbance signal in the three directions of
X, Y , Z, we serially connect the signals into a new signal S
in the order of X, Y , and Z, that is, S
i =[ Xi , Yi , Zi],w h e r e
i represents the data sample for the i -th car. Considering the
length of each Si is different, we consider the length of the
longest signal as the length reference, and the other shorter
signals are padded with the zero-padding method to keep the
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:20:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 6 =====

ZHANG AND HUANG: VEHICLE CLASSIFICA TION BASED ON FEA TURE SELECTION WITH AMR 9981
TABLE II
FEA TURE SUBSETS SELECTED BY FPE-F ILTER
TABLE III
VEHICLE CLASSIFICA TION RESULTS UNDER DIFFERENT CONDITIONS
feature dimensions of the entir e data set the same. Therefore,
each data point in a signal represents a feature of the data set.
In this paper, the number of features of the data set under the
no feature extraction condition is 846.
As can be seen in Table III, under the condition of using
data processed by feature extraction, feature selection slightly
improves recognition performance of the KNN and SVM
classiﬁers but slightly decreases performance of the C4.5 and
RF classiﬁers. From the perspective of run-time efﬁciency and
the number of selected features, FPE-Filter selects less than
half of the total number of features in about 4 seconds, but
achieves a classiﬁcation accuracy that is not inferior to no-
feature-selection. Under the condition of no feature extraction,
the accuracies of the four classiﬁers based on FPE-Filter are
improved compared with no-feature-selection, and the number
of features used has been reduced from more than 840 to only
about 30. In addition, under the same conditions, the data
based on feature extraction performs better on the classiﬁer
than the data without feature extraction, both in terms of classi-
ﬁcation accuracy and the number of features used. In summary,
the experimental results in Table III verify the high efﬁciency
of FPE-Filter and the necessity of using feature extraction.
Furthermore, this paper uses Clopper-Pearson interval to assess
the conﬁdence range of each classiﬁcation accuracy. It can
be seen that the conﬁdence intervals are kept in a small
range. And according to the average and the best value of
the classiﬁcation accuracy, we can also conclude that SVM
is more suitable for vehicle classiﬁcation than RF, KNN, and
C4.5. Table IV lists the classiﬁcation results for the three types
of vehicles that correspond to the SVM’s best classiﬁcation
accuracy. The corresponding feature subset is as follows
F
best =[ Xmax , X_Pmax , X_ Pmin , X_Nmax , Xvar , Ymax ,
Y _Pmax , Y _Pmin , Yvar , Z _Pmax , Z _Pmin ] (8)
As can be seen from Table IV , the classiﬁcation accuracy
of the three types of vehicles has reached more than 90%,
of which SAS achieves nearly 100%. The main misclassiﬁed
samples are mainly concentrated between TRUCK and BUS.
During the experiment, we found that if the distance between
the SUV and the sensor node is very close, the magnetic ﬁeld
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:20:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 7 =====

9982 IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 19, NO. 21, NOVEMBER 1, 2019
TABLE IV
THE BEST CLASSIFICA TION RESUL T OF SVM
disturbance caused by the SUV may reach the level of the
BUS. But the experimental results show that this inﬂuencing
factor can be offset by some features. In general, the high
classiﬁcation accuracy of the c lassiﬁcation model veriﬁes the
effectiveness of the FPE-Filter algorithm.
VII. C ONCLUSION
This paper studies the effectiveness of feature selection
for the vehicle classiﬁcation based on magnetic sensors from
the perspective of data mining. A novel and concise feature
selection algorithm, FPE-Filter, is used to select the optimal
subset from the 34 extracted features. The feature selection
algorithm needs to preset two input parameters, namely a
reliefF threshold W
t and a Pearson correlation coefﬁcient
threshold Rt . We compare the classiﬁcation performance of
the classiﬁers in the condition of feature extraction and no
feature extraction, respectively. The experimental results show
that the feature extraction can signiﬁcantly improve the accu-
racy of the classiﬁers. Under the premise of using feature
extraction, we also compare the classiﬁcation performance
of the four classiﬁers in the condition of FPE-ﬁlter and no
feature selection, respectivel y. The experimental results show
that FPE-ﬁlter allows using only approximately one third
of all considered features without decreasing classiﬁcation
accuracy. In the four types of classiﬁers that participated in
the comparison, SVM showed the best performance in both
the average accuracy and the highest accuracy. Although the
classiﬁer based on FPE-Filter is not signiﬁcantly better than
the classiﬁer without feature selection, it still has practical
application signiﬁcance due to its fewer feature numbers and
high classiﬁcation accuracy. If m ore vehicle data is collected,
we can get more accurate and reliable classiﬁcation results.
The experimental results reveal the preference of different
classiﬁers for different features, so ﬁnding efﬁcient features
is also one of the keys to improve classiﬁcation performance.
Under the experimental conditions of this paper, we did not
consider the interference fact ors of adjacent lanes. Congested
trafﬁc conditions can also make vehicle classiﬁcation more
difﬁcult. These will be the focus of our future research.
R
EFERENCES
[1] Q. Wang, J. Zheng, H. Xu, B. Xu, and R. Chen, “Roadside magnetic
sensor system for vehicle detection in urban environments,” IEEE Trans.
Intell. Transp. Syst. , vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 1365–1374, May 2018.
[2] X. Guan, Z. Zhang, J. Zhou, and F. Y u, “A vehicle detection algorithm
based on wireless magnetic sensor networks,” in Proc. 4th IEEE Int.
Conf. Inf. Sci. Technol. , Aug. 2014, pp. 727–730.
[3] X. Bao, H. Li, D. Xu, L. Jia, B. Ran, and J. Rong, “Trafﬁc vehicle
counting in jam ﬂow conditions using low-cost and energy-efﬁcient
wireless magnetic sensors,” Sensors, vol. 16, no. 11, p. 1868, 2016.
[4] S. Kaewkamnerd, R. Pongthornseri, J. Chinrungrueng, and T. Silawan,
“Automatic vehicle classiﬁcation using wireless magnetic sensor,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop Intell. Data Acquisition Adv. Comput. Syst.,
Technol. Appl., Sep. 2009, pp. 420–424.
[5] B. Y ang and Y . Lei, “V ehicle detection and classiﬁcation for low-
speed congested trafﬁc with anisotropic magnetoresistive sensor,” IEEE
Sensors J. , vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 1132–1138, Feb. 2015.
[6] S. Taghvaeeyan and R. Rajamani, “Po rtable roadside sensors for vehicle
counting, classiﬁcation, and speed measurement,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
Transp. Syst., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 73–83, Feb. 2014.
[7] H. Dong, X. Wang, C. Zhang, R. He, L. Jia, and Y . Qin, “Improved
robust vehicle detection and identiﬁcation based on single magnetic
sensor,” IEEE Access , vol. 6, pp. 5247–5255, 2018.
[8] S. Kaewkamnerd, J. Chinrungrueng, R. Pongthornseri, and S. Dumnin,
“V ehicle classiﬁcation based on magnetic sensor signal,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Inf. Autom. , Jun. 2010, pp. 935–939.
[9] S.-W. Lin, K.-C. Ying, S.-C. Chen, and Z.-J. Lee, “Particle swarm opti-
mization for parameter determina tion and feature selection of support
vector machines,” Expert Syst. Appl. , vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 1817–1824,
Nov. 2008.
[10] M. Aladeemy, S. Tutun, and M. T. Khasawneh, “A new hybrid approach
for feature selection and support vector machine model selection
based on self-adaptive cohort intelligence,” Expert Syst. Appl. , vol. 88,
pp. 118–131, Dec. 2017.
[11] H. R. Al Ghayab, Y . Li, S. Siuly, and S. Abdulla, “A feature extraction
technique based on tunable Q-factor wa velet transform for brain signal
classiﬁcation,” J. Neurosci. Methods , vol. 312, pp. 43–52, Jan. 2019.
[12] S. M. Pincus, “Approximate entropy as a measure of system complexity,”
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA , vol. 88, no. 6, pp. 2297–2301, Mar. 1991.
[Online]. Available: https:// www.pnas.org/content/88/6/2297
[13] R. Kohavi and G. H. John, “Wrappers for feature subset selection,” Artif.
Intell., vol. 97, nos. 1–2, pp. 273–324, 1997.
[14] Y . He, Y . Du, and L. Sun, “V ehicle classiﬁcation method based on
single-point magnetic sensor,” Procedia-Social Behav. Sci. , vol. 43,
no. 4, pp. 618–627, 2012. doi: 10.1016/j.sbspro.2012.04.135.
[15] S. Georganos et al. , “Less is more: Optimizing classiﬁcation perfor-
mance through feature selection in a very-high-resolution remote sensing
object-based urban application,” GISci. Remote Sens. , vol. 55, no. 2,
pp. 221–242, Nov. 2018.
[16] I. Kononenko, “Estimating attributes : Analysis and extensions of relief,”
in Proc. Eur . Conf. Mach. Learn. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 1994,
pp. 171–182.
[17] M. Robnik-Šikonja and I. Kononenko, “Theoretical and empirical analy-
sis of ReliefF and RReliefF,” Mach. Learn., vol. 53, nos. 1–2, pp. 23–69,
Oct. 2003.
Xueting Zhang received the B.Sc. degree from
Xi’an Jiaotong University in 2000, and the M.S. and
Ph.D. degrees from Zhejiang University, in 2003 and
2017, respectively.
He is currently an Associate Professor with
Hangzhou Dianzi University. His main research
interests include magnetic sensors-based deteciton
technique.
Haonan Huang was born in Zhejiang, China,
in 1995. He is currently pursuing the M.S. degree
with Hangzhou Dianzi University.
His research interests include the application of
magnetic sensors.
Authorized licensed use limited to: XIDIAN UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on March 21,2026 at 12:20:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 