

===== PAGE 1 =====

Missouri University of Science and Technology Missouri University of Science and Technology 
Scholars' Mine Scholars' Mine 
Electrical and Computer Engineering Faculty 
Research & Creative Works Electrical and Computer Engineering 
01 Jan 1978 
Vehicle Detection Using A Magnetic Field Sensor Vehicle Detection Using A Magnetic Field Sensor 
Stanley V. Marshall 
Missouri University of Science and Technology 
Follow this and additional works at: https://scholarsmine.mst.edu/ele_comeng_facwork 
 Part of the Electrical and Computer Engineering Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
S. V. Marshall, "Vehicle Detection Using A Magnetic Field Sensor," IEEE Transactions on Vehicular 
Technology, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 65 - 68, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Jan 1978. 
The definitive version is available at https://doi.org/10.1109/T-VT.1978.23725 
This Article - Journal is brought to you for free and open access by Scholars' Mine. It has been accepted for 
inclusion in Electrical and Computer Engineering Faculty Research & Creative Works by an authorized administrator 
of Scholars' Mine. This work is protected by U. S. Copyright Law. Unauthorized use including reproduction for 
redistribution requires the permission of the copyright holder. For more information, please contact 
scholarsmine@mst.edu. 

===== PAGE 2 =====

IEEE  TRANSACTIONS  ON  VEHICULAR  TECHNOLOGY,  VOL.  VT-27, NO. 2,  MAY 1978 
Vehicle Detection Using  a  Magnetic Field Sensor 
STANLEY v. MARSHALL, MEMBER, IEEE 
65 
Absfrucr-The measurement of vehicle magnetic moments and the 
results from use of a fluxgate magnetic sensor to actuate a lighting 
system from the magnetic fields of passing vehicles is reported. A 
typical U.S. automobile has a magnetic moment  of about 200 A-m2 
(Ampere-metersz), while for a school bus it is’about 2000 A-mz. When 
the vehicle is modeled as an ideal magnetic dipole with a moment  of 
200 A-mz, the predicted results from an analysis of the sensor-vehicle 
geometry agree closely with observations of the system response to 
automobiles. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
T 
HIS PAPER  results  directly  from  experimental  work  by 
the  author  during  the  last  four  Christmas seasons  in con- 
nection  with  the use  of a  fluxgate  magnetic  sensor as a  traffic 
sensor  for  automatic  switching of  Christmas  lights in front 
of  the  author’s  residence. The object has  been to have the 
lights turn on just as the  people in the  car  are  in  a  good  position 
to appreciate  the  scene,  and to switch  off  after  they pass by. 
Cars on either side of the  street,i.e., travelingin  either  direction, 
actuate  the  lights. 
Initially,  the  results were not  too  satisfactory,  primarily 
because the vehicle  magnetic field was not properly  under- 
stood.  To  measure  the vehicles, a  sensor was located on an 
overpass directly above a traffic  lane  of a city  street.  It  im- 
mediately  became  evident  that all vehicles  measured  were 
magnetized  with a south pole on top,  and  that  the  strength of 
the field is roughly  proportional  to  the size of  the  vehicle.  The 
polarity is  as expected  for an earth  induced  fieldin  the  northern 
hemisphere.  From  the  quantitative field measurements  and  the 
known  height  of  the  sensor above the  traffic  the  magnetic 
moments were computed  for  each  vehicle,  making  it possible 
to then  predict  traffic  sensor  performance  for given locations 
and  orientations of the  sensor.  Predicted  performance  quite 
closely matched  the  observed  performance,  i.e.,  a visual check 
of  the  position  of  the  vehicle  when  the  lights  were  switched  on 
compared  to  that  predicted  from  calculations. This  has  led to  a 
somewhat  tutorial  treatment of the  magnetic traffic sensor, 
following  a  brief  description  of  the  Christmas  lighting  system. 
11. DESCRIPTION OF CHRISTMAS  LIGHTING  SYSTEM 
The  system  block  diagram is shown in Fig. 1. The  sensor 
is located  at  curbside  directly in front of the scene to be lighted, 
about 10-20 feet (3-6  meters)  from  the  two  lanes  of  traffic 
and  below  the  centers  of  the  vehicles by about 0.75 meter. 
The  sensor  assembly  includes a permanent  magnet  on  the 
Manuscript received January 25, 1977; revised September 6,  1977. 
The author is with the Electrical Engineering Department, Univer- 
sity of Missouri-Rolla, Rolla, MO 65401, Telephone  (314)  341-4506. 
I fo uwrs 
t 
110 VAL 
Fig. 1. Block diagram of vehicle-actuated Christmas lighting system. 
sensor  axis  for  compensating  for  the  earth’s  magnetic  field. 
The  magnetic is spring  loaded  against an adjusting  screw  for 
fine adjustment of the  compensating  field. The  sensor  assembly 
was  buried  just  beneath  the  ground  surface  for  protection 
against  misalignment  and  with  the  sense  axis  nearly  vertical. 
The  fluxgate  sensor  and  sensor  electronics  used in this 
experiment have  been  described in a previous publication [ 11 . 
The  dc output from  the  sensor  electronics  required  additional 
amplification to actuate  a small  relay at the  arbitrary field 
level of 0.016  Ampere/meter (20 gammas)  chosen as the best 
compromise  between  sensitivity to passing  vehicles and  insensi- 
tivity to movements  of  cars in neighboring  driveways.  The 
small  relay in turn  operated  a larger  relay  used for  switching 
the few kilowatts of  power  required to  operate  the  lights. 
Solid-state  components  could  of  course have  been  used in 
place  of the  mechanical  relays. 
111. MAGNETIC FIELD FROM A VEHICLE 
The  magnetic fields from highway  vehicles  were studied 
using a  sensor  located  on an  overpass twenty-one  feet  directly 
above a  traffic  lane. Field  readings  were  recorded for  each 
vehicle as it reached  a  point  directly  beneath  the  sensor.  From 
the  known  distance  of  the  sensor  from  the  vehicles,  the 
magnetic  moments were computed.  From these measurements, 
it was concluded  that  a  typical US. automobile  has  a  magnetic 
moment in the range 100-300  A-m2  (Ampere-meter2) in SI 
units. The moment is vertical  with the  south  magnetic pole on 
top (this is  as expected in the  northern  hemisphere),  and  the 
magnitude  of  the  moment  appears  to be somewhat  propor- 
tional to  the size of the  vehicle,  although  the  magnetic 
moment  for  a  school  bus is ten  times  that  for an automobile 
while its  weight is only five to six times as great.  It  should also 
be mentioned  that  this  moment, which is induced  from  the 
earth’s  field,  should be a  function of latitude, being maximum 
0018-9545/78/0500-0065$00.75 0 1978  IEEE 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Missouri University of Science and Technology. Downloaded on July 07,2023 at 13:25:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 3 =====

66 IEEE  TRANSACTIONS ON  VEHICULAR  TECHNOLOGY, VOL. VT-27,  NO. 2, MAY 1978 
Fig, 2. Sensor-vehicle geometry. 
at  the  magnetic poles and  zero  at  the  magnetic  equator. In 
subsequent  calculations involving  the magnetic field from  a 
highway  vehicle,  the  vehicle is modeled as an ideal magnetic 
dipole  having a moment of 200  A-m2,  with  a vertical  axis and 
with  its  south pole on top. 
Referring to Fig. 2  for defining  the  variables, the field from 
a dipole is  given by [2] 
Im I Ampere (2 cos e; + sin ei} ___ H=- 
4rrr3 meter 
where Im j is the  magnitude of the  magnetic  moment in am- 
pere-m2  and His measured in amperes/meter. 
For h = 0 and  with  the sense axis vertical,  the  magnitude of 
the sensed  field is 
and when  (2) is solved for  r  for H = 0.016  Ampere/meter, 
= 9.98  meters 4n(0.016) 
= 32.7  feet. 
A correction  for  the  location of the  sensor  being about  0.75  m 
below  the vehicle  centerline gives a value  of 29.75  feet  for  the 
critical  distance  for  triggering  the  circuit  for  the  Christmas 
lights.  For  a very small car,  let us say 50  A-m2, or a  truck,  let 
us say 800  A-m2,  the  critical distances  would be 19  feet  and 
47  feet, respectively.  Observations of the  vehicle  positions  for 
relay acutation  tended  to  confirm  the above  calculations. A 
small  car on the far side of the  street barely  triggered  the 
system. 
Calculated  fields  versus time are the Gaussian shaped pulses 
shown in  Fig. 3 for  a vehicle  travelingpast  the  sensor  at  20 mph, 
where d is either 10 feet or 20  feet,  and  for h = 0. The critical 
field of 0.016  Ajm is exceeded  for 2.1 seconds  and 1.8 seconds, 
respectively. 
t SECONDS 
Fig. 3. Responses curves for 20-mph vehicle. 
IV. SENSOR  LOCATION 
Sensor  response is a  function of its  direction  from  the 
vehicle magnetic  moment as well as orientation  of  the sensor 
axis. h this  discussion the sensor  axis is assumed to be vertical, 
thus Only the  vertical component of the  field  from  the vehicle 
will  be sensed.  Referring to Fig. 2, 
Hvert =He sin 8 - H, cos e 
Im I 
4nr3 
-- - [-2  cos2 e + sin2 e]. (3 1 
Plots  of Hvert for  various  values of d and h are given in  Figs. 4 
and 5. Note  that  the  polarity of the sensed  field  reverses as e 
changes from 0" to 90". The angle at which  this reversal 
occurs,  i.e.,  where Hvert = 0 is 54.75",  and is found  by  setting 
Hvert equal  to  zero  and solving for e from  (3). This is the case 
depicted in  Fig. 5 ford = 3.6 m, h = 2.59 m, and also  in  Fig. 6 
for  the field from vehicle no. 2 where the sensor is directly 
above  vehicle no. 1  and whose  axis is orthogonal to  the field 
lines from vehicle no. 2. 
For  a  curbside  sensor,  the  maximum  response is obtained 
for h = 0, i.e.,  the sensor should be at  the same  height as the 
center  of  the vehicle. When the  sensor is 3.05  m (10 feet)  from 
a traffic lane, a change in sensor  height  from h = 0 to h = 1 
meter will reduce the sensed  field from  700  to  430 gammas, a 
reduction of 39  percent. This is shown by plots  in Fig. 5. Maxi- 
mum response is for  a sensor to be located  directly above  or 
below  the traffic lane.  The  effect of the vehicle  deviating  by 
0.5  m  and 1.0 m  from  the  center of the  traffic  lane is shown 
by the  set of curves  of  Fig. 4  for a height of 2.59 m for  the 
sensor. When the  traffic  lane is 3.66 meters (12 feet)  from  a 
line  2.59 m  directly above  or beneath  the  sensor,  the sensed 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Missouri University of Science and Technology. Downloaded on July 07,2023 at 13:25:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 4 =====

MARSHALL:  VEHICULAR  DETECTION BY MAGNETIC  FIELD 
S METERS 
Fig. 4. Response for sensor above or below vehicle, showing effect of 
offset from vehicle path. 
1 bo 
0 
-/M 
a 2 -- I 
3 
< -JM 
-444 
2 .no 
- Clo 
-7m 
Fig. 5. Response curves for various heights and offsets of sensor 
from  traffic  lane. 
Fig. 6. Illustrating  location of sensor for rejecting signals from 
adjacent  lane. 
67 
field is exactly  zero  at  the  point  of  closest  approach  although 
there is a field  of about 30-40 gammas  sensed  when  the vehicle 
is four or five meters  either side  of this  point.  Refer again to 
the d = 3.6, h = 2.59 curve of Fig. 5. Advantage may be taken 
of  this  feature  to  locate sensors  such that  they will sense 
traffic  in  one  lane  and be  very  insensitive to traffic  in  an  adja- 
cent  lane. The threshold  could be set  at 200 gammas  which 
would  actuate  the  system  for  everything  in  the  traffic lane 
except possibly a small motorcycle,  and  would  not  actuate 
even for  a large truck  in  an  adjacent  lane. 
V.  TIMING  APPLICATIONS 
The author is aware  that in at least one  application  where 
the  time  period  between successive signals from  two  different 
sensors was very  critical as it was used to  determine  the speed 
of  the vehicle,  magnetic  sensors  were  rejected [3]. One  can 
gain some  insight into  this  problem  by  referring  to Fig. 4. If 
for  example  the vehicle passed directly above one  sensor  and 
one  meter  to  the  left  or right  of a  point  directly above the 
other  sensor,  the  threshold level of  say 200 gammas  would be 
reached at S = -2.6  m for  the first  sensor  and  at S = -2.4  m 
for  the  second  sensor. If the sensors  were twelve feet  apart, 
this  could cause an error in A7 on the  order  of 5 percent  and 
the same proportional  error  in  the  computation  of  speed. The 
lower  the  threshold  setting,  the smaller the  error in A7 due  to 
a change in vehicle path. 
If the  sensor is too close to  the vehicle, it can sense indi- 
vidual  magnetic  moments  within  the overall framework  of  the 
total vehicle, and  the field  pulse  due to  motion of  the vehicle 
past  the  sensor will then have multiple  peaks or at least be 
broadened over  those  plotted in this paper. This might be 
undesirable  for  any  timing  application. The minimum  distance 
for  the  sensor  for  good  response pulse  shape has  not  been 
determined in this  study  but is probably on the  order  of  1.5 
meters  for  the average automobile. 
VI. SOME ADDITIONAL  CONSIDERATIONS 
A few years  ago the  fluxgate  magnetometer was mass- 
produced  and widely deployed  for  detecting  weapons  at  airport 
security  gates.  Traffic  sensor  applications  could  use  much  of 
the same basic components. The fluxgate  sensor is inherently  a 
simple and rugged  sensor,  and  although  publications have dealt 
with  the  extreme  effort  required to  produce  a  stable  sensor  for 
space  applications  [4] ~ sensors for  traffic  applications, as  was 
the case for  airport  security,  may be constructed  from  com- 
mercial  grade tape  cores. 
The  fluxgate  sensor  can be easily packaged  in  a  container 
smaller than  a  pack  of  cigarettes.  No active components are 
required  in  the  sensor  assembly. The power  consumed  by  the 
sensor  electronics is almost  entirely  that  required  for  the 
amplifiers as the basic excitation  and  detection  requires  only 
on the  order  of  a  100  milliwatts. Since no contact  with  the 
vehicle is required,  the  sensor can  be protected  from  the 
weather. 
The  fluxgate  sensor is basically a dc device or  presence 
indicator,  i.e.,  it  does  not  require  motion  to  produce an output. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Missouri University of Science and Technology. Downloaded on July 07,2023 at 13:25:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 5 =====

68 IEEE  TRANSACTIONS  ON  VEHICULAR  TECHNOLOGY,  VOL.  VT-21,  NO. 2, MAY 1978 
This  can be a  problem if a vehicle parks  near  the  sensor, 
creating  a  continuous  “trigger.” However, it is simple to ac 
couple  the  output of  the  detector to the  amplifier?  or  where 
long  time  stability is critical  and  where  presence  indication  for 
stationary  vehcles is undesired to use a  long  time  constant 
integrator in a  feedback  loop to provide  an automatic  zeroing 
compensate field by  supplying  current to  a solenoidal  com- 
pensate  winding around  the  sensor. This replaces  the permanent 
magnet  earth field compensation used  by  the author  and 
would be more  practical  for  highway  installation. In fact,  with 
the  electronics  one  could  program to zero  the  sensor  for  a 
trigger signal greater than  a specified number of seconds in 
duration. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
A fluxgate  magnetic  sensor  used as a  traffic  sensor to  auto- 
matically  trigger  some  Christmas  lights  has  provided  a 
demonstration relatively  easy to visually  verify.  Calculations, 
based on measured  magnetic  moments of vehicles,  provide a 
much  more  complete  picture of  the  potential of the  magnetic 
sensor and  some of the  important  considerations  such as the 
orientation of  the  sensor  and  its  distance  from  the  vehicle. 
Applications  may be suggested to the  reader for which he did 
not previously have the necessary  quantitative  data to consider. 
It is conceded  that  for  certain precise  timing  applications 
magnetic sensors  may not be able to meet all the  requirements, 
but  the  convenience of a small concealed  weatherproof  flux- 
gate  sensor should  not be overlooked as a possible option  for 
counting  or sensing  the  presence  of  highway  vehicles. 
REFERENCES 
[ 11 Stanley V. Marshall, “A gamma-level portable ring-core magnetom- 
eter,” ZEEE Trans. Magn., vol. MAG7, no. 1, pp. 183-185, Mar. 
1971. 
[2] Ramo, Whinnery, and Van Duzer, Fields  and Waves in Communi- 
cation  Electronics. New York: Wiley, 1965, sec. 2.31. 
[ 31 Informal Conversation with Developers of the ORBIS 111 System, 
1972. 
[4] D. I. Gordon, R. H. Lundsten, R. A. Chiarado, and H.  H. Helms, 
Jr., “A fluxgate sensor of high stability for low field magnetrom- 
etry,” IEEE Trans. on Magn., vol. MAG4, pp.  397-401, Sept. 
1968. 
Stanley V. Marshall (”57) was born  in Long 
Lane, MO, on October 3, 1927. He received the 
B.S. degree in electrical engineering from 
Oregon State University, Corvallis, in 1954,  and 
the M.S. and F’h.D. degrees in electrical engi- 
neering from the University of Missouri, 
Columbia, in 1965  and  1967. 
During World War 11 he served as an Elec- 
tronics  Technician in the U.S.  Navy. Upon 
joining Bell Telephone  Laboratories in 1954, 
he became associated with the development 
and testing of radars for the Nike guided missile systems. From 1961 
to  1963  he was engaged in evaluation of the performance of the Nike 
Zeus system at Kwajalein, Marshall Islands. He joined  the Electrical 
Engineering Department of the University of Missouri-Rolla in 1967, 
where he has  been  conducting  developmental work with  fluxgate mag- 
netic field sensors. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Missouri University of Science and Technology. Downloaded on July 07,2023 at 13:25:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 